Briefly, I would say he's misreading the Book of Mormon, and disregarding what LDS actually say about it. 

Taken at the most simplistic, what the Book of Mormon says is "all we can do" is repent and be reconciled to God, per Alma 24:10-11. 

LDS have talked about this topic and this passage a ton, and read it differently. 

Here, for example, are two articles by BYU scholars in a teaching journal aimed at Seminary and Institute professionals. 

https://rsc.byu.edu/vol-15-no-2-2014/what-can-we-do-reflections-2-nephi-2523

https://rsc.byu.edu/vol-18-no-1-2017/after-all-we-can-do-2-nephi-2523

Here's a LDS Bible scholar who used to work in Church translation talking about it. (His article the podcast is based on won a minor award, but I can't find the article.) 

https://interpreterfoundation.org/ldsp-despite-all-we-can-do-with-daniel-o-mcclellan/

And see here for my VERY long take. https://benspackman.com/2023/07/covenant-and-law-grace-works-and-faith/

Covenant, Law, Grace, Works, and Faith: Understanding the Contexts of Scripture (updated) - Ben Spackman
Ben
Ben Spackman
Bottom line, modern popular Evangelical ideas of "saved by grace" aren't terribly biblical.
Ben
Ben Spackman
Quoting from my own thing: 
"We often hear about 2 Nephi 25:23,

“we are saved by grace after all we can do”
but misunderstand and misinterpret that latter half in a perfectionist way. Rather, we  should read with 2 Nephi 10:24-

“after ye are reconciled unto God, that it is only in and through the grace of God that ye are saved.”
This suggests that “all we can do” is equivalent to “be reconciled unto God”, that is, commit to doing God’s will and trying to change when we fail to do so. That sounds a lot like the baptismal covenant, doesn’t it? More on covenant and relationships below. (On 2 Nephi 25:23, see Joe Spencer’s article here, and more recent treatments here and here.)

Other LDS passages— 2 Nephi 31:19; 3 Nephi 27:16, D&C 45:4-5 (D&C 38:3-4); Alma 33:11, 13 (Alma 41:6); 2 Nephi 2:3 (By whose righteousness is Jacob redeemed?), Moroni 10:32-33"

I don't have time or patience to argue with people directly. If you want to arrange that, join the cavalry and ask Travis or Stephen Smoot.

My take is, if the dude is not willing to do some homework and read, he's not sincerely interested in learning.

I mean, is he really interested in learning how LDS think of salvation? Or is he trying to convince YOU that YOU misunderstand your own scriptures and religion, and YOU really are trying to "save yourself by works"?

He’s like a 1st century Jew who demands evidence from the Torah that “circumcision is nothing” and you can eat pork.

Challenge his Protestant sola scriptura assumptions

https://youtu.be/4WhTFoDzQws?si=Qwy1W2-mFDjAyYEz

And search the group for “mouw” if you haven’t seen that one

If truth is based upon how many manuscripts there are, then what about the Quran? What about Homer’s Odyssey?

Yeah, may be a dead end.

There’s a missionary-accessible copy of my Grace article in the cavalry drive

There’s a shared Google drive in The Cavalry fb group.

This is my sub-drive. https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1ldUfdytudOZEq7D-AzTx7M7hdagoDN4H

I'm out of the state for the next six weeks or so.

Yes

Tempe institute, 11:30am

Was finishing up my slides, with my phone off

https://www.fairlatterdaysaints.org/conference/august-2019-old/a-paradoxical-preservation-of-faith

Such a letdown, I imagine...

Genesis 1 as we currently have it bears the marks of being edited in Babylon by Israelite priests, yeah.

From the JST to Genesis. Which raises the question, what is the JST?


This is a traditional/conservative take. To my mind, it doesn't wrestle sufficiently with some of the data.

https://rsc.byu.edu/study-faith/how-we-got-book-moses

This is my overview of the Genesis/Moses/Abraham/Temple data. https://www.fairlatterdaysaints.org/conference/august-2019-old/a-paradoxical-preservation-of-faith

"modern day revelation" is not a very useful descriptor. I'd give these a read as well.

https://rsc.byu.edu/archived/you-shall-have-my-word/they-might-come-understanding-revelation-process

Grant Underwood's BYHU devotional called “Relishing the Revisions: Joseph Smith and the Revelatory Process"

(FB won't let me post the link, "goes against community standards.")

Grant Underwood, “Revelation, Text, and Revision: Insight from the Book of Commandments and Revelations,” BYU Studies 48, no. 3 (2009)

Woodward- "How the Revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants Were Received and Compiled." Ensign (January 1985)

https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/ensign/1997/08/the-joseph-smith-translation-plain-and-precious-things-restored?lang=eng

https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/byusq/vol42/iss2/3/

https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1045&context=sba

You don’t go through 1.5 PhD programs and conceptualize history, scripture, and doctrine like someone with a BA in English or chemistry.

We know that Genesis has hints of edits from Babylonian priests, and the Book of Moses is the JST of Genesis, so where does the Book of Moses originate?

Conservative take
https://rsc.byu.edu/study-faith/how-we-got-book-moses

This is my overview of the Genesis/Moses/Abraham/Temple data. https://www.fairlatterdaysaints.org/conference/august-2019-old/a-paradoxical-preservation-of-faith

https://rsc.byu.edu/archived/you-shall-have-my-word/they-might-come-understanding-revelation-process



https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=4199&context=byusq____https://speeches.byuh.edu/devotionals/relishing-the-revisions-joseph-smith-and-the-revelatory-process

https://benspackman.com/byu/


https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/ensign/1997/08/the-joseph-smith-translation-plain-and-precious-things-restored?lang=eng

https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/byusq/vol42/iss2/3/

https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1045&context=sba

Hyrum Andrus was kind of nutty, and under some doctrinal church discipline from Salt Lake City  at times...

I’m in Mexico City for two weeks 🙂

1) Let's be clear about the difference between "evidence" and "proof."
2) "Evidence" comes in different kinds, and virtually every religion has some evidence for it. 
3) Faith is not the result of accumulating a certain amount of evidence, but rather, spiritual experience and personal conviction. 

Evangelicals (And Reformed/ Calvinists in particular) are prone to both cluelessly overemphasize the role and amount of evidence for Protestant beliefs. 

So is there evidence for the Book of Mormon? Sure. Is it relevant? Not really. We want people converted, not convinced.

We are not trying to convince people; we are trying to lead them to have spiritual experiences of conversion, and reduce obstacles to faith with the best information we have. We can demonstrate that our faith is reasonable, but we don’t want to reason people into the Gospel, because that’s not lasting #conversion.
     "But even at its best, the resolution of doubts by reason and appeal to evidence cannot take us far. It is helpful to meet a brilliant mind who defends gospel truths with fact and logic. There is comfort in finding that such a person has confronted the same questions with which you struggle and has retained his faith. But there is a hazard. Even the most brilliant and faithful person may defend the truth with argument or fact that later proves false. The best scholarship has, at least, incompleteness in it. But even flawless argument has a weakness if you come to depend on it: What happens to the next doubt, or the next? What if no physical evidence or persuasive logic can be produced to dispel it? You will find then what I have found— that faithful scholar who reassured you with logic did not base his faith there. It was the other way around. His faith reassured him that someday, when God told him how it was all done, he would see all truth as perfectly logical, transparently reasonable. In the meantime he was enjoying discovering what he could with the logic he could muster." -President Henry B #Eyring.  To Draw Closer to God, p. 142
"It is commonly said that if rational argument is so seldom the cause of conviction, philosophical [and scholarly] apologists must largely be wasting their shot. The premise is true, but the conclusion does not follow. Though argument does not create conviction, the lack of it destroys belief. What seems to be proved may not be embraced; but what no one shows the ability to defend is quickly abandoned. Rational argument does not create belief, but it maintains a climate in which belief may flourish." -Austin Farrer

"I had only traveled a short time to testify to the people, before I learned this one fact, that you might prove doctrine from the Bible till doomsday, and it would merely convince a people, but would not convert them. You might read the Bible from Genesis to Revelation, and prove every iota that you advance, and that alone would have no converting influence upon the people. Nothing short of a testimony by the power of the Holy Ghost would bring light and knowledge to them—bring them in their hearts to repentance. Nothing short of that would ever do. You have frequently heard me say that I would rather hear an Elder, either here or in the world, speak only five words accompanied by the power of God, and they would do more good than to hear long sermons without the Spirit. That is true, and we know it. (JD 5:377.)" - Discourses Of Brigham Young, p. 330; Teaching, No Greater Call p. 43. 
"Debate and argument have not that saving effect that has testifying to the truth as the Lord reveals it to the Elder by the Spirit. I think you will all agree with me in this; at least, such is my experience. I do not wish to be understood as throwing a straw in the way of the Elders storing their minds with all the arguments they can gather to urge in defense of their religion, nor do I wish to hinder them in the least from learning all they can with regard to religions and governments. The more knowledge the Elders have the better. (JD 8:53)  -Discourses Of Brigham Young, p. 33

Well, read my blog, and watch/listen to my stuff. 90% of what's in this series is already out there somewhere in my other material.

Doesn't start til fall. Then she's researching her next book.

Have you seen this? https://youtu.be/4WhTFoDzQws?si=dwcbIL2E2aXdNlQX

It’s useful, but utility doesn’t necessarily translate into a good paying job or career

... The science of evolution is well established. It's not a pro or con thing

Why should evolution preclude the existence of Adam and Eve figures?

Science is only methodologically atheistic; plenty of scientists are Christians (as well as Jews, Muslims, etc.) Evolution is not incompatible with the existence of God or God creating.

"Genesis is true" is doing a LOT of work here, lol. What is Genesis actually asserting? Is it natural history? Definitely not. 
Give this a quick read. https://www.asa3.org/ASA/PSCF/1984/JASA9-84Hyers.html

I'm not convinced Genesis 1 IS talking about "spiritual creation." That's implied by the bridge in Moses, but Moses is technically a different text. Different General Authorities have had different understandings of what spiritual creation is and the relationship between the two creation accounts. See https://archive.org/details/instructor1006dese/page/228/mode/2up?view=theater

See also my talk here. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p5AQZSYPWfE

The textual bridge connecting the two creation accounts. Moses 3:4-5, the parallel to Genesis 2:4. I talk about it in that video.

I don't think your conclusion follows logically from the first part of your statement, for a variety of reasons, including accommodation and the necessity of having to interpret revelation. https://www.fairlatterdaysaints.org/conference/august-2017/truth-scripture-and-interpretation

This is what getting a PhD in history entails. A LOT of research, a lot of pulling on threads, and reading/searching systematically through known sources.

About every four years unless I’m teaching something out of it. With exceptions.

More Or less yeah. I try to do whatever the yearly thing is plus keep up with the Bible.

Since that’s my area specialty

Instead of reading in English at face value with no ancient context?

Revelation is not our only source of knowledge, and especially not where science is concerned. The Church will rarely, if ever, comment one way or another on scientific claims.

It's as proven as anything else. 98% of scientists find it the best explanation of data across dozens of fields. 
https://hermiene.net/essays-trans/relativity_of_wrong.html


"Porter Moody
Also do you agree that any revelation that the church claims to have received is 100% infallible?" Absolutely not

https://benspackman.com/2018/03/on-the-nature-of-prophetic-knowledge-with-a-side-helping-of-evolution/

All revelation has deeply human aspects, for a variety of reasons, like accommodation. But the degree of "wrongness" is relative.

Looks like the FAIR website is down, but you can read about accommodation here. https://web.archive.org/web/20240423202600/https://www.fairlatterdaysaints.org/conference/august-2017/truth-scripture-and-interpretation


==============================================================================
Half a century has now passed since Latter-day Saint scholars began to give systematic attention to what the Book of Mormon has to say about the role played by grace in salvation. Although the earliest efforts in this direction were, according to one early (and unappreciative) observer, limited to “Mormon academic circles,” [1] subsequent developments have drastically expanded the impact of such study. Thanks especially to the immensely popular writings of Stephen E. Robinson and Robert L. Millet beginning in the late 1980s and early 1990s, and more recently to the similarly popular writings of Brad Wilcox, English-speaking Latter-day Saints have generally become better aware of the unmistakable fact that salvation by grace is among the principal teachings of the Book of Mormon. [2] As all of these authors emphasize, however, at least one Book of Mormon text seems to warn against giving too much prominence to grace: Nephi’s famous statement that grace saves us only “after all we can do” (2 Nephi 25:23). This one passage—more than any other—has been used to justify a certain understanding of the Atonement, that grace is the reward for righteous works rather than the enabling gift that makes all works possible in the first place. As Robinson, Millet, and Wilcox all state, it is necessary to determine the meaning of this passage to clarify what the Book of Mormon teaches about the Atonement.

In this paper, I build on the work of these and other scholars. [3] I do so, however, by offering a theological interpretation of 2 Nephi 25:23 that is distinct from any other in the relevant literature. My intention is to provide a three-pronged approach to interpreting the passage. In a first section, I highlight a number of ambiguities in Nephi’s words that have not been sufficiently noted. Paying attention to these details helps to make clear that Nephi’s saying is far more complex than it might at first appear, so further work must be done if Nephi’s words are to be understood as he meant them to be. In a second section, I turn my attention to potential scriptural sources on which Nephi might have drawn in outlining his understanding of grace. Only one source is identified—the only absolutely sure source related to Nephi’s words—and it proves to be immensely helpful in attempting to clarify Nephi’s meaning. In a third section, finally, I look at the context into which Nephi inserted the doctrine of grace. The setting in which Nephi decided to say something about grace helps both to clarify his meaning and to suggest a way in which the doctrine of divine grace applies to concrete situations. In the end, I hope to show that Nephi’s words, read carefully, highlight and enrich—rather than simply fail to contradict—the Book of Mormon’s clear emphasis on grace.

A word about methodology is likely necessary, since I offer in what follows a theological reading of scripture. [4] Contrary to certain popular associations with the word theology, to interpret scripture theologically is neither to systematize doctrines nor to square prophetic passages with academically fashionable secular perspectives. Rather, it is simply a matter of asking how scripture might inform theological reflection, that is, how it might shape responsible thinking about questions pertaining to the life of religious commitment. Consequently, in what follows, I undertake neither a strictly historical investigation (where the aim would be to determine what Nephi’s words meant in their original historical context) nor a strictly doctrinal study (where the aim would be to determine how Nephi’s words coalesce with official or authoritative teachings). I draw on what I take to be the best of such work, but my aim is principally to ask how Nephi’s words might help to shape charitable reflection on the struggles of the average Latter-day Saint to be right with God. [5] Questions of charity have unmistakably motivated the reinterpretations offered by Robinson, Millet, and Wilcox. I hope they motivate my own, more emphatically theological investigation of 2 Nephi 25:23 as well.

Ambiguities in 2 Nephi 25:23

Nephi’s words are as familiar as any in the Book of Mormon: “For we labor diligently to write, to persuade our children, and also our brethren, to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God; for we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do” (2 Nephi 25:23). But just as familiar as the words themselves, unfortunately, is a certain problematic interpretation of this passage. In his well-known book Believing Christ, Stephen Robinson identifies the problem: “At first glance at this scripture, we might think that grace is offered to us only chronologically after we have completed doing all we can do, but this is demonstrably false.” [6] It is demonstrably false that grace is given only after we have done all that lies in our power because—as Robinson goes on to explain—everything we do is through the life that God in loving grace has already extended to us. As King Benjamin reminded his people, God “has created you from the beginning, and is preserving you from day to day, by lending you breath, that you may live and move and do according to your own will, and even supporting you from one moment to another”

(Mosiah 2:21). It is in this sense that, as Bruce C. Hafen has put it, “the Savior’s gift of grace to us is not necessarily limited in time to ‘after’ all we can do. We may receive his grace before, during, and after the time when we expend our own efforts.” [7]

It is, then, false that grace comes to us only after and in response to our first doing all we could possibly do to obtain salvation. But it is also entirely unclear that Nephi’s words are meant to suggest anything like what readers tend to see in his words at first glance. The supposedly obvious reading is, in other words, not obvious. [8] This is because, Nephi’s penchant for plainness notwithstanding, 2 Nephi 25:23 is a difficult text, and one that deserves close reading. To understand just how unclear Nephi’s words are, a few interpretive questions, none of which has any obvious answer, might be asked:

How important to the interpretation of 2 Nephi 25:23 is the use of the word we? The word appears four times in the passage, and the first two instances of the word have a limited rather than a general meaning. When Nephi says that “we write” and “for we know,” he seems straightforwardly to be using the word we to refer to those who write scripture for the benefit of later Nephites (“our children”) and Lamanites (“our brethren”). Does the referent of we change in the last bit of the passage, when Nephi says that “we are saved” and refers to “all we can do”? If so, why? And if not, how does the meaning of the text change?
In the first part of 2 Nephi 25:23, Nephi claims that his aim is to persuade his readers “to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God.” How are these two things—believing in Christ and being reconciled to God—different, and how significant is the difference between them? Is it important that the first is active (one believes in Christ), but the second is passive (one is reconciled to God)? Is it important that the first is connected only to the Son (one believes in Christ), but the second seems to be connected to the Father (one is reconciled to God)? Most importantly, which of these—or is it both of them—does Nephi understand as being linked to salvation by grace?
Whatever Nephi ultimately means to suggest when he qualifies salvation by grace (that is, by adding “after all we can do”), it has to be recognized that he ties salvation exclusively to grace. Indeed, even if one interprets him as affirming the claim that grace comes only after and in response to human efforts, it has to be confessed that the only source for salvation he identifies is grace (grace does the actual saving, even if it is mobilized by human efforts). However it should be qualified, Nephi’s statement that “it is by grace that we are saved” could not on its own terms be much clearer. How should this incontrovertible fact shape interpretation of Nephi’s words?
Is it at all clear what Nephi means by the word after? Stephen Robinson has suggested that the word in this passage serves as “a preposition of separation,” with the result that Nephi’s message, paraphrased, amounts to the following: “We are still saved by grace, after all is said and done.” [9] And there are other meanings of after with which to experiment. Noah Webster’s original American Dictionary of the English Language—published in 1828 and therefore a helpful source for understanding the meaning of English words at the time Joseph Smith dictated Nephi’s writings to his scribe—reminds us that after sometimes means “in imitation of” or “according to the direction and influence of” (as in “to walk after the flesh”). [10] How might alternative (but plausible) interpretations of the word after change the way we interpret the passage?
Had Nephi meant to say that grace comes to us only chronologically after and in direct response to our best efforts, should he have said not “it is by grace we are saved, after all we can do” but “it is by grace we are saved, after we have done all we can do”? Strictly speaking, the claim that grace saves “after all we can do” does not say or imply anything whatsoever about human efforts actually being made—or even attempted, for that matter. Is there something heavy-handed about assuming that Nephi meant to say “after we have done all we can do” when his words read otherwise? If so, how should a reference to what can be done, without any actual mention of what has been done, be understood?
As these questions evince, what has for far too long passed as the obvious reading of 2 Nephi 25:23 is anything but obvious. The pronoun Nephi uses is ambiguous; he draws distinctions we as readers tend to ignore; he qualifies salvation by grace only after affirming it straightforwardly; he formulates his qualification with a preposition whose meaning is uncertain; and he mentions only what can be done—not what has been done. Moreover, I suspect that further close scrutiny of the text would allow other complicated (and complicating) questions to be raised. But if there is no straightforward or obvious meaning of Nephi’s words concerning grace, how is the text to be interpreted? Are there no answers at all to any of the questions raised here? I think there are answers, but they are not to be secured through an appeal to the supposedly obvious meaning of the text. Rather, they are to be learned through an investigation of Nephi’s scriptural sources.

Jacob and NephiJacob and Nephi wrote and taught things that would help people believe in Jesus Christ. Jerry Thompson, © Intellectual Reserve, Inc.
Sources for 2 Nephi 25:23

It might seem a bit bold to suggest that Nephi drew his understanding of salvation by grace from an identifiable human source. At worst, such a suggestion might be regarded as a secular gesture, a refusal to consider the possibility that Nephi came to know the nature of salvation directly from God, or at least through the Spirit. These are real and justifiable worries, and yet it seems undeniable—as I believe will become clear—that Nephi more borrowed than revealed his doctrine of salvation by grace. The source for his understanding seems rather straightforwardly to have been his brother Jacob.

Close reading of Nephi’s writings suggests that he was right to borrow his understanding of salvation from Jacob. While Nephi says very little about Christ’s Atonement—primarily, it seems, because he was much more interested in the history of Israel, which was the focus of his most important prophetic vision (recorded in 1 Nephi 11–14)—Jacob is presented in Nephi’s record as the primary audience of Lehi’s remarkable sermon on the Atonement in 2 Nephi 2, and the sole preacher of the other great sermon on the Atonement in Nephi’s writings, 2 Nephi 9. Moreover, it was Jacob who, after Nephi’s death, would ask of his readers the rhetorical question, “Why not speak of the atonement of Christ, and attain to a perfect knowledge of him?” (Jacob 4:12). While Jacob cut his teeth on Atonement theology and continued to reflect on it to the end of his prophetic career, Nephi gave his time first and foremost to understanding the Abrahamic covenant, the chief subject of the writings of Isaiah. [11] In light of these details, it makes perfect sense that Nephi’s few words on grace are deeply rooted in—indeed, more or less borrowed from—his brother’s teachings. [12]

Making of his brother Jacob one of the three “sentinels at the gate of the [Book of Mormon]” positioned to “admit us into the scriptural presence of the Lord,” Nephi includes in 2 Nephi a lengthy two-day-long sermon that Jacob delivered to the Nephites. [13] At its heart, of course, is one of the Book of Mormon’s most remarkable sermons on salvation, mentioned just above (2 Nephi 9). At the conclusion of Jacob’s words on the second day of the sermon, however, the following passage appears: “Wherefore, my beloved brethren, reconcile yourselves to the will of God, and not to the will of the devil and the flesh; and remember, after ye are reconciled unto God, that it is only in and through the grace of God that ye are saved” (2 Nephi 10:24). It is, I think, unmistakably from these words that Nephi draws (or at least to these words that Nephi alludes) in his own teaching concerning salvation by grace some fifteen chapters later. Indeed, not only are there clear parallels in language that link the two passages, but there is also a structural indication that the two passages are connected. Each of the two passages is immediately followed by a discussion of what it means to interpret scripture spiritually, and Nephi places the one discussion (2 Nephi 10:23–11:8) immediately before and the other (2 Nephi 25:1–30) immediately after the scriptural text he hopes his readers will regard through a spiritual lens (the so-called Isaiah chapters of 2 Nephi 12–24). Jacob’s and Nephi’s respective statements about grace, are together, along with the discussions in which they find their immediate context, thus clearly meant to frame Nephi’s lengthy quotation of Isaiah. [14]

However, the close relation between the words of the two passages is essential in the structural details. At least three major elements are common to the two texts. First, just as Nephi states that one of his purposes is to persuade his readers “to be reconciled to God,” Jacob pleads with his hearers to “reconcile yourselves to the will of God.” Second, just as Nephi straightforwardly states that “it is by grace that we are saved,” Jacob claims that “it is only in and through the grace of God that ye are saved.” Finally, just as Nephi concludes his teaching concerning grace with a prepositional phrase beginning with the word after (“after all we can do”), Jacob qualifies his claim by a prepositional phrase beginning with the word after (“after ye are reconciled unto God”). These three parallels suggest a tight connection between the two passages. It seems best to assume that Nephi drew his understanding of the role played by grace in salvation directly from the teachings of his brother—teachings he carefully decided to include in his record.

Placing Jacob’s and Nephi’s words side by side helps in a number of ways to clarify the meaning of Nephi’s teaching. First, it seems that Nephi’s claim that “it is by grace that we are saved” should be read in light of Jacob’s still-plainer statement: “it is only in and through the grace of God that ye are saved.” Jacob leaves no room for the idea that something of our own efforts plays a role in saving us, even if Nephi’s more ambiguous formulation seems to do so. [15] Second, the parallel between Nephi’s and Jacob’s prepositional phrases, each beginning with the word after (“after all we can do” and “after ye are reconciled unto God”), suggests the likelihood that “all we can do,” as in Nephi’s formulation, is “be reconciled to God.” This, moreover, accords nicely with the use of the phrase “all we can do” elsewhere in the Book of Mormon. [16] More importantly, these first two points of clarification help to provide answers to two of the questions raised in the preceding section of this paper. In light of Jacob’s unmistakable insistence that salvation comes only in and through divine grace, the question of how much weight should be granted to Nephi’s having attached salvation only to grace is answered. Further, the clarification that “all we can do” is “be reconciled to God” helps to clarify what it is from the first half of 2 Nephi 25:23 that Nephi means to link directly to salvation. A third point of clarification—the most difficult but also the most instructive—provides answers to the other three questions raised in the preceding section.

A third point of clarification, then, is that the structure of Jacob’s words in 2 Nephi 10:24 makes clear that the qualifying prepositional phrase (beginning with the word after) is meant there to specify the time when the injunction to remember becomes relevant, rather than the time when grace becomes operative. In other words, by having “after ye are reconciled unto God” interrupt the injunction to “remember . . . that it is only in and through the grace of God that ye are saved,” Jacob suggests that what comes after reconciliation with God is not the divine granting of grace but the human remembering of grace—the recognition on the part of the reconciled that salvation was, is, and will always be God’s work. This application of the prepositional phrase beginning with after might be productively transferred to Nephi’s teaching. In other words, it seems that the phrase “after all we can do” is meant to specify the time when “we know that . . . we are saved,” rather than the time when “we are saved.” Nephi’s words, in fact, could be rearranged to mirror the structure of Jacob’s, making them slightly clearer: “for we know, after all we can do, that it is by grace that we are saved.”

This third point of clarification makes it unnecessary to speculate about unconventional meanings of the word after, theologically fascinating though the implications of such experiments might be. The word after seems, in the end, just to mean “chronologically after,” though it specifies the time when something is to be remembered or recognized (“we know”) rather than the time when something is to be effected or brought to pass (“we are saved”). At the same time, this third point makes clear why Nephi refers to what can be done without making mention of anything actually having been done. Regardless of what actually has been done, grace is what saves—and that remains true even after all that can be done. Even if the most remote theoretical possibilities are realized, it is still grace that saves. [17] Finally, this third point of clarification seems to answer the question concerning Nephi’s ambiguous use of the word we. While in the usual interpretation of 2 Nephi 25:23, it is assumed that the referent of the word changes (from we the writers of scripture to we human beings), the parallel with Jacob’s teaching makes clear that the referent of the word remains constant through the whole passage. Nephi intends to teach his readers what he has come to realize, after all he can do: that it is by grace—and grace alone—that he is saved. [18]

Jacob’s words in 2 Nephi 10:24 are the (extremely) likely source for Nephi’s words concerning grace in 2 Nephi 25:23, and the connection between the two passages clarifies the meaning of Nephi’s teaching in a remarkable way. Far from claiming that grace comes only after and in response to our own best efforts (which, again, is demonstrably false), Nephi says that grace is what characterizes the whole divine work of salvation, and that what comes after—or at least should come after—salvation is a full recognition of the unique role played in salvation by grace. All that Nephi and Jacob ask their readers and hearers to do is to be reconciled to God, and reconciliation is what happens only when we stop holding out against God’s purposes, when we “yield” and therefore cease, at last, to be “an enemy to God,” as the angel put it to King Benjamin (Mosiah 3:19). To speculate a bit, perhaps Nephi and Jacob jointly modeled their teachings on Exodus 31:13, where the Lord announces that it is only when human beings stop working for themselves (by giving themselves to Sabbath observance) that they “may know that I am the Lord that doth sanctify you.” [19]

Applications of 2 Nephi 25:23

The basic sense of Nephi’s words concerning the role played by grace in salvation has been clarified. It remains to be asked what Nephi understood to be the relevance of the doctrine. Why is it in 2 Nephi 25 that he makes this most famous of his statements regarding the Atonement, since those statements are few and far between? If Nephi assumes a generalizable understanding of grace, what is to be learned from the context into which he inserts that understanding? In order to feel the real force of Nephi’s (borrowed) conception of grace, and not just to understand its intelligible meaning, it is necessary to consider the context of 2 Nephi 25:23.

Unfortunately, little work has been done on the context of Nephi’s words concerning grace. Those who have contributed substantially through their writings to the development of a Latter-day Saint awareness of grace, have generally focused on broad themes as they are reflected in isolated passages. [20] And commentaries on the Book of Mormon tend to say relatively little about the nuances of textual context. [21] This is unfortunate because Nephi’s statement about salvation by grace is integral with the text that surrounds it. In 2 Nephi 25, read as a coherent whole, one can find a kind of guide for understanding the implications and relevance of the doctrine of salvation by grace. To comprehend that larger context, however, requires some work, since it cannot be understood without careful attention to Nephi’s general purposes in producing his small plates record.

At a very broad level, it should be noted that 2 Nephi 25:23 appears in the stretch of Nephi’s record—from 2 Nephi 6 to 2 Nephi 30—to which Nephi himself gave the title of “the more sacred things” (1 Nephi 19:5), the part of his record he was directly commanded to produce for his children. That privileged stretch of text is almost exclusively focused on the writings of Isaiah, not only due to the presence, at its heart, of thirteen chapters drawn more or less without alteration from the brass plates (2 Nephi 12–24), but due also to the focus both Jacob and Nephi have on Isaiah in their respective contributions to the text (2 Nephi 6–10 and 2 Nephi 25–30). [22] But as interesting and deserving of attention as most of 2 Nephi 6–30 is, it is obviously what Nephi does in his narrower contribution (2 Nephi 25–30) that is most immediately relevant here.

The first chapter of Nephi’s contribution, within which his statement regarding grace is to be found, is clearly meant to set up the chapters that follow. The chapter naturally divides into three parts: (1) 2 Nephi 25:1–8 contains a kind of apology for the inclusion, without clarifying commentary, of so many chapters of Isaiah’s writings; (2) 2 Nephi 25:9–19 shifts the focus from Isaiah’s prophecies to what Nephi calls “[his] own prophecy” (2 Nephi 25:7), a plainer vision of things that is intended to clarify what in Isaiah’s texts is most important; and (3) 2 Nephi 25:20–30 contains an aside about Nephi’s general purposes in creating his record. Nephi’s reference to grace (in 2 Nephi 25:23) falls within the third of these three parts of the chapter, but it can only be understood in light of the two that precede it.

For present purposes, little needs to be said about Nephi’s apology for including Isaiah among “the more sacred things” (part 1 of 2 Nephi 25). What is essential is that he believed that his own prophecy could be used to clarify Isaiah’s writings (part 2). The chapters immediately following 2 Nephi 25 are given to a remarkable weaving of Isaiah’s writings (in particular, Isaiah 29) into Nephi’s own prophetic understanding (in particular, his vision recorded in 1 Nephi 11–14). [23] What Nephi thus presents in the first two parts of 2 Nephi 25 is an introduction to—and a foretaste of—what he will go on to do more generally in his contribution to the text, namely, to interlace the various elements of his own apocalyptic vision with the written text of Isaiah’s brass plates prophecies.

Why is all this important to the interpretation of the aside Nephi offers in the third part of 2 Nephi 25, within which his words regarding grace appear? It is because it was the apocalyptic vision of 1 Nephi 11–14, summarized in part 2 of 2 Nephi 25, that originally provided Nephi with his reasons for producing his record—the very reasons he reviews in part 3 of 2 Nephi 25. That apocalyptic vision, unmistakably the most important of Nephi’s prophetic experiences, focused on a single, crucial event: the sudden emergence in the last days of a book that would solve the world’s religious problems, unmistakably the Book of Mormon. The angelic guide who accompanies Nephi during the vision describes the book in the following words: “For behold, saith the Lamb, I will manifest myself unto thy seed, that they shall write many things which I shall minister unto them, which shall be plain and precious. . . . And the words of the Lamb shall be made known in the records of thy seed, as well as in the records of the twelve apostles of the Lamb” (1 Nephi 13:35, 41).

From these words (and nothing more was told to Nephi by way of description of the book), and from the earlier part of his vision in which he saw the visit of the resurrected Christ to his father’s descendants, Nephi would most naturally have concluded that the book he had seen coming forth to supplement the Bible in the last days would be, not his own writings, but the writings of his children living during and after the visit of the Christ. And indeed, as many textual details suggest, Nephi seems to have seen his major purpose in writing his record less to contribute to the book that would make known “the words of the Lamb” than to inspire the production of that book by his children. [24]

It is this that Nephi explains in 2 Nephi 25:23 and the verses surrounding it. The prophecy Nephi inserts into part 2 of 2 Nephi 25 culminates in a prediction of the coming forth of the book, but he clearly differentiates between that book and his own record as he explains, in part 3, his purposes in writing. Thus, Nephi describes the prophesied book from his vision as something that will eventually aid in “convincing [the Jews] of the true Messiah, who was rejected by them” (2 Nephi 25:18), while he describes his own record as addressed principally to his children, his brethren, his people, and, more generally, the seed of Joseph (2 Nephi 25:20–21, 23, 26–28). [25] And Nephi provides a set of purposes for directing his own writings to Lehi’s children. He writes his record with the intent: (1) “to persuade [them] to believe in Christ” (2 Nephi 25:23); (2) to help them to “know to what source they may look for a remission of their sins” (2 Nephi 25:26); (3) to be sure that they “know the deadness of the law” so that they will not “harden their hearts against [Christ] when the law ought to be done away” (2 Nephi 25:27); (4) to inform them that “the right way is to believe in Christ and deny him not” (2 Nephi 25:28); (5) to encourage them to “keep the performances and ordinances of God until the law shall be fulfilled” (2 Nephi 25:30); and, most importantly, (6) to instruct them to take as “the law” whatever “words” Christ would “speak” to them after he had “risen from the dead” (2 Nephi 26:1). From these and other texts, it is clear that Nephi’s intention with his record was first and foremost to prepare his people for Christ’s visit to the New World, thereby preparing them to assume the task they would have of producing a book reporting the words of the visiting Christ. Nephi saw it as his life’s work to ensure, by writing for his direct descendents, that the book he saw in vision would eventually be written.

Significantly, in the middle of his explanation, Nephi refers to salvation by grace. His worry, clearly, was that his descendants who, six centuries later, would be present at the visit of Christ to the New World would be tempted to resist the announcement of the fulfillment of the law of Moses. Having come himself to see, after all he could do, that grace is what lies behind salvation, Nephi wanted his children to learn the same lesson. He wanted them to see, once the law had been fulfilled, that it was nothing they did or could have done that delivered them from sin and death, because it was in fact Christ who delivered them from sin and death. Nephi wanted his children—he wrote with the explicit hope to persuade them on this point—to believe in Christ and to be reconciled to God. His worry was that they might resist God, and specifically that they might do so in the name of the law of Moses. If they did that, they would certainly fail to write the book Nephi had seen in vision.

Nephi took the doctrine of grace to be most relevant when he recognized the real temptation human beings feel to resist the revelatory. This may come as a bit of a surprise. We are naturally inclined to feel that grace is what needs to be understood when we experience the burnout that can result from working intensely to fulfill the never-ending demands that come with activity in the Church. [26] For Nephi, though, the sole efficacy of grace is what needs remembering when we are inclined to think that programs and practices, norms, and traditions—even when these have their origins in inspiration—matter more than what God wishes to teach us now. Grace is what we are ignoring whenever we resist God’s gentle (or not-so-gentle) entreaties. We manifest our ignorance of the role played in salvation by grace whenever we feel guilty about waiting on the Lord, whenever we feel we ought just to get to work because we know what we are supposed to do and now just need to get it done. Grace is what we need to come to understand anew when we see that we simply do not have the patience to be still, and know that God is God. If we can be still—not only in body but also in spirit—we might know, as Nephi did, that God is God, and that it is God who saves by grace.

This is a lesson that Nephi himself had to learn with great difficulty. He retrieved a copy of the law of Moses for his people only after he finally ceased resisting God’s Spirit—which he did twice: first by trying to do things his own way (simply asking Laban for the plates, and then attempting a trade), and then by refusing the constraint of the Spirit (to kill Laban with his own sword). [27] We should not be surprised that Nephi could not bear the thought that his children might eventually take the very law he had thus secured for them as a reason in turn to resist God’s word to them. Nothing worried Nephi more than those who say, “We have received the word of God, and we need no more of the word of God, for we have enough!” (2 Nephi 28:29). Nephi testified clearly to the nature of his God: “For behold, thus saith the Lord God: I will give unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little . . . unto him that receiveth I will give more” (2 Nephi 28:30). Thus, to realize fully that what saves is grace—God’s good will, expressed in the form of covenantal bonds—is to realize that whatever our excuse might be for holding out against God, it is a poor one.

This, then, is the concrete meaning of salvation or deliverance by grace, as I think Nephi understands it: to be given to see that God still speaks, and to be given to receive what he says in full faith. All we can do is resist the temptation to hold out against the Spirit’s enticements and constraints. After that, it only remains for us to remember the source of our strength to resist, which was never ours to begin with.

Notes

[1] Sterling McMurrin, The Theological Foundations of the Mormon Religion (Salt Lake City: University of Utah, 1965), 67.

[2] See Stephen E. Robinson, Believing Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992); Robert L. Millet, Grace Works (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 2003); and Brad Wilcox, The Continuous Atonement (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 2009).

[3] Other important works along lines similar to those drawn by Robinson, Millet, and Wilcox are Bruce C. Hafen, The Broken Heart: Applying the Atonement to Life’s Experiences (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989), and Donald P. Mangum and Brenton G. Yorgason, Amazing Grace: The Tender Mercies of the Lord (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1996). Also worthy of mention, though written in a different vein, are Hugh Nibley, “Work We Must, but the Lunch Is Free,” in Approaching Zion, ed. Don Norton (Salt Lake City and Provo: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1989), 202–51; C. Terry Warner, Bonds That Make Us Free: Healing Our Relationships, Coming to Ourselves (Salt Lake City: Shadow Mountain, 2001); Blake T. Ostler, Exploring Mormon Thought: The Problems of Theism and the Love of God (Salt Lake City: Greg Kofford Books, 2006); and Adam Miller, Rube Goldberg Machines: Essays in Mormon Theology (Salt Lake City: Greg Kofford Books, 2012).

[4] For a good but brief introduction to theological interpretation of scripture, see Kevin J. Vanhoozer, “What Is Theological Interpretation of the Bible?,” in Dictionary for Theological Interpretation of the Bible, ed. Kevin J. Vanhoozer, Craig G. Bartholomew, Daniel J. Treier, and N. T. Wright (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2005), 19–23. Many helpful short articles on theological interpretation can be found in the same volume.

[5] See Adam S. Miller, “Introduction” in An Experiment on the Word: Reading Alma 32, ed. Adam S. Miller (Salem, OR: Salt Press, 2011), 1–8.

[6] Robinson, Believing Christ, 91; emphasis added.

[7] Hafen, The Broken Heart, 155–56.

[8] One might object at this point that the vulgar interpretation Robinson singles out is too easy to criticize, that it would be more responsible to focus on more sophisticated readings of 2 Nephi 25:23. Is it “demonstrably false,” for instance, that Nephi has reference specifically to one sort of grace (the sort associated with salvation), where other prophets might have reference to another sort of grace (the sort associated with creation)? Presumably not. For my own purposes, though, such a rightly-concerned objection strengthens rather than weakens my point—namely, that an interpretation of Nephi’s words must be undertaken more carefully, since the passage is more difficult than it might seem at first glance.

[9] Robinson, Believing Christ, 91–92. Other interpreters have followed suit. See Mangum and Yorgason, Amazing Grace, 60–61; Millet, Grace Works, 131; and Wilcox, The Continuous Atonement, 104.

[10] Noah Webster, American Dictionary of the English Language, facsimile ed. (Baltimore: United Book, 2009), s.v. “after.”

[11] While Nephi says relatively little about Atonement theology and focuses almost exclusively on covenant theology, Jacob seems to have been deeply interested in both themes. Jacob gives his attention to Isaiah and the covenant in major parts of his sermon in 2 Nephi 6–10 (likely providing Nephi with his motivations for including it along with Isaiah and his own prophecies in 2 Nephi 6–30), and he returns to the theme in a most striking way in Jacob 4–6.

[12] Of course, it does not necessarily follow from the fact that Nephi said relatively little about atonement that he knew relatively little. It is entirely possible that Nephi came to understand the nature of the Atonement independently of Jacob but from the same source—whether divine (through the Spirit, presumably) or human (from his father, Lehi). I suspect otherwise, but there is more than one speculative story that could be told to account for the textual details.

[13] Jeffrey R. Holland, Christ and the New Covenant: The Messianic Message of the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1997), 36.

[14] See Joseph M. Spencer, An Other Testament: On Typology (Salem, OR: Salt Press, 2012), 53.

[15] One might suggest that Jacob’s talk of “reconciling oneself to God” indicates what must be done to be saved, but it is difficult to square too strong an interpretation along such lines with Jacob’s insistence that “it is only in and through the grace of God” that salvation is granted. Jacob does not deny that something must be done, but he denies that anything apart from God’s grace actually accomplishes the work of salvation.

[16] Robert Millet connects 2 Nephi 25:23 to Alma 24:10–12, where the king over the newly-converted Anti-Nephi-Lehies says that “it has been all that we could do . . . to repent of all our sins,” as well as that “it was all we could do to repent sufficiently before God.” See Millet, Grace Works, 131–32.

[17] Brad Wilcox makes some similar points in Wilcox, The Continuous Atonement, 109–11.

[18] This last point, concerning the referent of “we,” is one I return to in the third section of this paper.

[19] Much more needs to be said to justify fully what I have offered here as a passing interpretation of “reconciliation” (that is, as a gesture of stopping). Here I mean only to indicate a direction for further theological reflection.

[20] The exception is Mangum and Yorgason, Amazing Grace, 58–59. While these two scholars at least suggest the importance of the passage’s textual context, they say very little about it.

[21] Brant Gardner does provide interesting historical context, but he says little about the textual context of 2 Nephi 25:23. See Brant A. Gardner, Second Witness: Analytical and Contextual Commentary on the Book of Mormon, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Greg Kofford Books, 2007), 2:343–48. In light of the textual context of 2 Nephi 25:23, I think some of Gardner’s conclusions are overly hasty.

[22] The structure of Nephi’s record has been analyzed in Frederick W. Axelgard, “1 and 2 Nephi: An Inspiring Whole,” BYU Studies 26, no. 4 (Fall 1986): 53–66; and, in much greater detail, in Spencer, An Other Testament, 33–68.

[23] See Heather Hardy and Grant Hardy, “How Nephi Shapes His Readers’ Perceptions of Isaiah,” in Reading Nephi Reading Isaiah: Reading 2 Nephi 26–27, ed. Joseph M. Spencer and Jenny Webb (Salem, OR: Salt Press, 2011), 37–62.

[24] Nephi seems to have begun to glimpse the possibility of a wider audience for his writings relatively early in his project (see 1 Nephi 19:18–21), but he seems only eventually to have come to the conviction that they would actually be a part of the book he saw in vision (see 2 Nephi 33:13). On this point, see Grant Hardy, Understanding the Book of Mormon: A Reader’s Guide (New York: Oxford University Press, 2010), 79.

[25] Second Nephi 25:22 makes clear again that Nephi recognized the possibility that his writings might have readers other than and in addition to his intended audience.

[26] This is the scholarly conclusion of the anthropologist who studies contemporary Mormon culture as well. See Douglas J. Davies, The Mormon Culture of Salvation (Burlington: Ashgate, 2000).

[27] Of course, the text never directly asserts that the first two attempts to retrieve the brass plates from Laban were at odds with divine purposes. I take it, however, that this is at least implied by the fact that the Spirit is mentioned for the first time when Nephi enters Jerusalem for the third attempt.

==============================================================================
A Book of Mormon verse that has led to immense discussion and scrutiny is 2 Nephi 25:23: “For we labor diligently to write, to persuade our children, and also our brethren, to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God; for we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do.” It is particularly the last part of the verse, “after all we can do,” that has garnered the most attention since it seems to qualify the statement on grace and leads interpreters to define what grace means in LDS belief and consequently what role our efforts or works play in relation to grace. A significant article dealing with this verse, and to which this article is responding and nuancing, was written by Joseph Spencer in 2014.[1] Spencer’s excellent analysis of this verse reinforces the importance of focusing on the context of this verse, particularly the grammatical subjects within the verse, in order to pull the meaning out of the last phrase. Yet unlike Spencer’s article, which is a theological reading of the scripture, this piece will try to focus more on Nephi’s historical situation in an effort to better understand what Nephi’s words meant in their initial context (something Spencer cursorily alludes to in a later section of his paper). Too often the last half of the verse is touted as an overarching statement of LDS doctrine on grace without paying careful attention to its meaning within its original literary context. Nephi’s original context, especially the verses that follow verse 23, emphasizes salvation only coming through Christ, yet it also encourages continued observance of the law of Moses in order to be reconciled to God, for that is all they could do until Christ fulfilled the law through his Atonement.

Spencer raises five excellent questions from the reading of 2 Nephi 25:23 that highlight the verse’s ambiguities and, consequently, its difficulty for interpretation. The simple reading and traditional interpretation of verse 23, that grace comes chronologically after we have expended our best efforts, is the least likely correct interpretation even though it is often provided as a proof text on the role of grace in LDS theology (and thus is frequently used as fodder by critics of the Church who feel that Latter-day Saints maintain a theology of “earning” salvation). Thus I agree with Spencer’s conclusion that “the obvious reading of 2 Nephi 25:23 is anything but obvious.”[2] In order to set the stage for a discussion of a possible meaning of this verse, a brief discussion with Spencer’s five questions will follow.

Spencer’s Five Questions

Question 1 asks who the subject “we” in the verse is understood to be and whether that subject changes. I concur with Spencer that a key to understanding this verse is that the subject does not change, and thus the “we” is Nephi and other record keepers, prophets, and teachers who want to persuade their own children and brethren to believe in Christ. In other words, it is primarily directed to their own people in their own day.

Question 2 asks whether there is a difference between “believing in Christ” and being “reconciled to God,” and which of them (or both) is connected to grace? As will be shown below, “reconciled to God” seems to be tied with keeping the Mosaic covenant under which they were bound, while “believing in Christ” helped them remember to whom the law was pointed and who is the ultimate source of salvation. “Believing in Christ” was more linked to grace since Christ not only fulfilled the law of Moses but satisfied the law of justice, a gift offered through Christ’s Atonement.

Question 3 points out the clear connection between salvation and grace and thus asks how this relationship should affect our interpretation of this verse. Nephi seems to emphasize this incontrovertible relationship so that his listeners and readers will never think there is another way to salvation, such as the law of Moses. It is similar to what Abinadi would later teach the priests of King Noah when he responded to his own question directed to them: Does salvation come by the law of Moses? (see Mosiah 12:31). He stated, “And now ye have said that salvation cometh by the law of Moses. I say unto you that it is expedient that ye should keep the law of Moses as yet; but I say unto you, that the time shall come when it shall no more be expedient to keep the law of Moses. And moreover, I say unto you, that salvation doth not come by the law alone; and were it not for the atonement, which God himself shall make for the sins and iniquities of his people, that they must unavoidably perish, notwithstanding the law of Moses” (Mosiah 13:27–28; emphasis added).

Question 4 explores the possible meanings of “after” in this verse, which is certainly one of most important issues since it can dramatically alter the verse’s interpretation. As alluded to previously, “after all we can do” is often interpreted as some type of chronological disclaimer that creates a relationship between grace and our best efforts or works. After we have exhausted all our efforts, grace will then make up the difference and fill in the gap until we qualify for salvation.[3] The difficulty with this view is determining the role of grace before we have done all that we can do. Another difficulty is determining when we have done enough, or our “best,” in order for Christ to do the rest?

Some commentators, like Stephen Robinson, have defined “after” as something different from a chronological marker, more a term of separation. In this case, “after” becomes something like “in spite of” or “notwithstanding” to emphasize the absolute role of grace in our salvation after all is said and done.[4] The possible problem with this view is determining the role of one’s own works in relation to salvation, especially in Nephi’s context. It can lead to the notion that we do not need to do anything and we will be saved. Yet there are many scriptures that emphasize Christ’s commands to repent and obey, in other words, to be a faithful, covenant-keeping disciple (e.g., Mosiah 2:24; John 14:15; 2 Nephi 32:1, 3–5).[5] As will be discussed below, Nephi does seem to use “after” with a chronological sense, but more in the sense of the sequence in God’s salvation history (the various acts or epochs through which he works with his children here on earth), not “after” our own works.

In question 5, Spencer explores how the wording of the verse would be different if Nephi had meant “after we have done all we can do.” Stated another way, if Nephi didn’t word it this way, why is it often interpreted in this sense? Thus question 5 focuses on the distinction between what can be done versus what has been done. I agree with Spencer here that the emphasis is not on what Nephi, his family, and his followers did or accomplished in the past (or their works), but it presents what is expected of them to do, what can be done, even if that is not the cause of salvation.

We will now try to explore this verse in more depth, paying particular attention to its literary context to hopefully better understand Nephi’s original intent and teaching. The discussion of the context will help us better understand the subjects of verse 23 and the progression of the argument Nephi is making in this chapter.

Literary Context—Before 2 Nephi 25:23b

Second Nephi 25 comes after Nephi has quoted many chapters from Isaiah. He starts this chapter sharing his feelings on the importance of Isaiah for his people despite the fact that he has not taught them in the manner of the Jews, a deficiency which has made some of Isaiah’s sayings hard for them to understand. Nephi mentions that he will now speak in plainness and prophesy so that his readers can understand Isaiah’s words, particularly his prophecies regarding the house of Israel and its gathering in the last days. Nephi states that for those who think Isaiah’s words are of no worth, he will speak particularly to them “and confine the words unto mine own people” (2 Nephi 25:8). Through the Spirit, Nephi shares prophecies about the coming of the Messiah among the house of Israel and its subsequent rejection of him. As a result, the house of Israel will be scattered and scourged for many generations until it believes in the Son of God and does not wait for another Messiah (see 2 Nephi 25:16). “Then, at that time,” Nephi states, “the day will come that it must needs be expedient that they should believe these things [Nephi’s prophecies about Christ’s atoning mission]” (2 Nephi 25:16). God will then proceed to gather the members of the house of Israel and his words will judge them and convince them of the true Messiah they had rejected.

Nephi next gives a plain prophecy that the Messiah would come among his people in six hundred years from the time they left Jerusalem, and his name would be called Jesus Christ, the Son of God (2 Nephi 25:19). Then, teaching by analogy,[6] Nephi shows that just as Moses and the children of Israel were powerfully delivered through God’s hand, “There is none other name given under heaven save it be this Jesus Christ, of which I have spoken, whereby man can be saved” (2 Nephi 25:20). This statement is consistent with other places in scripture where physical deliverance is a sign that God can also save us spiritually (e.g., Alma 38:4–5) and corresponds to what Nephi will emphasize a few verses later, that salvation can only come through Jesus Christ.

In the ensuing verses, Nephi shares that God promised that his writings would be preserved and handed down to his seed. He also explains that Joseph (of the Old Testament) was promised that his seed would never perish (2 Nephi 25:21), which sets up Nephi’s next prophetic statement and leads up to our verse in question: “Wherefore, these things [Nephi’s writings and prophecies] shall go from generation to generation as long as the earth shall stand; and they shall go according to the will and pleasure of God; and the nations who shall possess them shall be judged of them according to the words which are written” (2 Nephi 25:22). Then in verse 23, Nephi suddenly goes from first person singular to first person plural without explaining who is joining him. “For we labor diligently to write, to persuade our children, and also our brethren, to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God” (emphasis added). It could have reference back to the only other plural group mentioned in this chapter—the prophets—whose words, along with the words of the angel of God, prophesy of Jesus’s name and his coming mission in mortality (see verse 19). Or, more in line with what follows, he could be referring to others in his own day, such as his brothers Jacob and Joseph, who were consecrated teachers of the people (see 2 Nephi 5:26) and who would labor diligently to teach and write to their children and brethren about Christ.

Thus the context of 25:23b includes the following:

Nephi emphasizes the importance of Isaiah’s prophecies regarding the scattering and gathering of the members of the house of Israel and the role of the Messiah among them.
Nephi focuses his plain words on those who do not think Isaiah’s words are important, and he confines his words to his own people.
The house of Israel will reject the Messiah and be scattered until it believes in the Son of God; then it will believe “these things” (presumably his writings and those of Isaiah and others in the record).
Nephi reiterates the doctrine that there is no other name save Jesus Christ through which salvation can come.
Nephi knows his records will be preserved and passed down to his seed, so the writers of the record labor diligently so that their posterity and brethren can believe in Christ and be reconciled with God.
Jesus ChristHow do we determine when we have done enough, or our "best," in order for Christ to do the rest?
Literary Context—After 2 Nephi 25:23b

Saved by Grace after All We Can Do

In the second half of 2 Nephi 25:23, Nephi continues to talk using the first person plural, we: “For we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do” (2 Nephi 25:23). One important point to note is that the subject we remains consistent throughout the verse. Just as we labor diligently to write and persuade our children and brethren, so we know it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do. In other words, the last phrase is not a universal statement on grace in God’s plan of salvation but a limited statement about Nephi’s and associated record keepers’ own situation and purpose. This setting raises the question, What did Nephi believe that he and his people needed to do? The context of this verse helps answer this question.

2 Nephi 25:24—We Keep the Law of Moses until the Law Shall be Fulfilled

Although many people interpret our phrase in 2 Nephi 25:23 with little or no attention to what follows, the literary context demands a connective reading. First, verse 24 is strongly linked to the previous verse by the use of the conjunctions “and notwithstanding.” Second, both verses have the same we subject, and third, both verses seem to be using a series of alternating parallel phrases:

A “And, notwithstanding we believe in Christ,

B we keep the law of Moses,

A and look forward with steadfastness unto Christ,

B until the law shall be fulfilled” (2 Nephi 25:24).

If this verse, full of a series of parallel phrases, is a continuation of the previous verse—the first pair of phrases having to do with Christ (A) and the second pair with the law of Moses (B)—then it may inform our reading of verse 23. The conjunction “notwithstanding” is key to deciphering its interpretation. “Notwithstanding we believe in Christ” is connected to verse 23’s efforts to persuade their children to believe in Christ and his redeeming grace. Yet notwithstanding this belief, they continue to keep the law of Moses until it is fulfilled because it is all they can do for the time being. According to the logic of this parallelism, belief and grace in verse 23 refer to Christ, and “be reconciled to God” and “all we can do” refer to observance of the law of Moses.[7] In other words, all Nephi and his people can do in a pre-Christ setting is keep the law of Moses to be reconciled to God while believing and looking forward to Jesus’s Atonement in the future.[8] Nephi knew that the Atonement is what would bring ultimate salvation after Christ’s fulfillment of the law of Moses (“fulfillment” connotes not only the law’s completion but Christ’s perfect obedience to it in order to bring it to its completion). In the meantime, the law of Moses provided a way to be reconciled with God, to be obedient and faithful to what God had asked of them, and to receive all the blessings of the future Atonement.

2 Nephi 25:25—We Keep the Law Because of the Commandments

The next verse (2 Nephi 25:25), especially with the epexegetical conjunction “for,” connects with the previous thought and carries on the discussion of the importance of keeping the law for the time being while expounding upon the relationship between Jesus Christ and the law of Moses:

A “For, for this end was the law given;

B wherefore the law hath become dead unto us,

B' and we are made alive in Christ because of our faith;

A' yet we keep the law because of the commandments” (2 Nephi 25:25).

This verse explains the purpose for which the law was given (to point towards Christ and his fulfillment of the law) and the sentiment that the law has become dead unto them because they know it will be fulfilled: a sentiment, incidentally, shared by Paul in a postresurrection setting. A true understanding of and faith in Christ’s mission—whether living before, during, or after Jesus’s ministry—include a realization that he is the source of salvation, not the law. The law is only preparatory and instructive. The law does not bring them true life, but they are made alive through faith in Christ, a very Pauline-like statement. Yet they continue keeping the law because they were commanded to do so; at this point, it is all they can do.[9]

2 Nephi 25:26–27—The Deadness of the Law Versus Life in Christ

Verses 26 and 27 continue the contrast between Christ as the source for remission of sins and the deadness of the law. The emphasis also remains on teaching their children about the law so that the children can learn of its deadness. It is as if they are living in a limbo status where they know the law is not the ultimate source of salvation, yet they still teach and keep it until Christ comes to fulfill it.[10] “Wherefore, we speak concerning the law that our children may know the deadness of the law; and they, by knowing the deadness of the law, may look forward unto that life which is in Christ, and know for what end the law was given” (2 Nephi 25:27).[11] The end of verse 27 includes the same word “after” as in verse 23, delineating the chronological sequence between the two key events in God’s salvation history we have been discussing, the law of Moses and Christ’s atonement: “And after the law is fulfilled in Christ, that they need not harden their hearts against him when the law ought to be done away” (2 Nephi 25:27; emphasis added). Nephi was trying to teach that the law of Moses would serve a purpose for a period of time ,but he was concerned some would resist giving up the law after its fulfillment by Christ because it was what they had observed for so long to bring them closer to God. Nephi prophetically saw the struggle many Jews and even early Christians and later Nephites faced with the teaching that old things like the law of Moses would be done away. This foresight was fulfilled when, during Jesus’s visit to the later Nephites, Jesus perceived that they struggled to understand this concept that he had given as part of his sermon at the temple mount (see 3 Nephi 12:17–20, 46–47; 15:2–5). Jesus had to emphasize that he had given the law earlier but that the law had been fulfilled in him and had ended, so now they needed to keep the commandments he was now teaching them to enter the kingdom of heaven. “Behold, I say unto you that the law is fulfilled that was given unto Moses. Behold, I am he that gave the law, and I am he who covenanted with my people Israel; therefore, the law in me is fulfilled, for I have come to fulfil the law; therefore it hath an end” (3 Nephi 15:4–5). “Therefore come unto me and be ye saved; for verily I say unto you, that except ye shall keep my commandments, which I have commanded you at this time, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven” (3 Nephi 12:20).

2 Nephi 25:30–26:1—We Keep the Law Until the Law Shall Be Fulfilled

In 2 Nephi 25:30, Nephi repeats his key teaching that, in the meantime and until the law is fulfilled, it is necessary to keep the law of Moses: “And, inasmuch as it shall be expedient, ye must keep the performances and ordinances of God until the law shall be fulfilled which was given unto Moses” (2 Nephi 25:30; emphasis added). The chronological pointer “until” relates to the notion that Christ’s saving mission and fulfillment of the law will come after the only thing they can do now, which is keep the performances and ordinances of the law of Moses. The next verse teaches that once Christ fulfills his mission and appears to Nephi’s descendants, his words will become the new law: “And after Christ shall have risen from the dead he shall show himself unto you, my children, and my beloved brethren; and the words which he shall speak unto you shall be the law which ye shall do” (2 Nephi 26:1; emphasis added). A few chapters later, Nephi repeats a similar point when he says that no more doctrine would be given “until after he [Jesus] shall manifest himself unto you in the flesh. And when he shall manifest himself unto you in the flesh, the things which he shall say unto you shall ye observe to do” (2 Nephi 32:6). Jesus himself reiterated this principle when he clearly declared in 3 Nephi 15:9–10, “I am the law” and “I have given unto you the commandments; therefore keep my commandments.” The eventual Nephite implementation of all this is related in 4 Nephi 1:12: “And they did not walk any more after the performances and ordinances of the law of Moses; but they did walk after the commandments which they had received from their Lord and their God.”

Thus the context of 2 Nephi 25:23 can be summarized as follows:

The topic of verse 23 continues in the next several verses through the use of conjunctions and the same we subject (which included Nephi and other prophets and record keepers), describing their specific situation: teaching their children to believe in the coming Messiah while living under the law of Moses.
Parallel phrases contrast grace and Christ with “all they can do” and the law of Moses.
Strong statements describe life coming through Christ and deadness to the law, yet a temporal disclaimer is given that they continue to keep the law because they have been commanded to do so.
A recognition that after the law of Moses is fulfilled, Christ’s words will become the new law, the new path to salvation.
Summary

As enticing as it is to read 2 Nephi 25:23 as a universal doctrinal statement about the relationship between grace and one’s good efforts or works, the context of the verse points to something else. Nephi was writing for himself and other record keepers to a specific audience, his children and brethren (“I . . . confine the words unto mine own people”; 2 Nephi 25:8). They understood that salvation came through the grace offered by the future Messiah, Jesus Christ, and that that salvation would come after all they could do living the law of Moses in their current situation. They knew that the law of Moses alone could not bring them salvation—it was a dead end—but they continued to observe its performances and ordinances for three primary reasons: they had been commanded to do so, it would reconcile them to God, and it pointed them towards Christ. It was all they could do until Christ appeared unto their descendants following his resurrection and taught them his new law. So ultimately they (Nephi and his pre-Christ descendants) knew they were saved by the grace of Christ’s atoning mission, which would be fulfilled later chronologically (i.e., in the meridian of time), yet they also already received blessings of grace by concurrently doing all they could do (keeping the law of Moses). This passage is not an argument of doing good works to the point when grace kicks in, but, as in Galatians, it is a recognition that we are saved by grace through the coming of Christ to perform the Atonement (the chronological “after”), not through the works of the law of Moses (see Galatians 2:16; 3:19–25). Christ’s Atonement is the greatest manifestation and source of grace, and its full blessings came after, because the law of Moses was fulfilled. Therefore, Nephi and others teach their children about Christ, the source of remission of sins (verse 26), and the deadness of the law and the purpose for which the law was given (verse 27). It is ironic that 2 Nephi 25:23 has often been used as ammunition by “grace only” believers who feel that the Book of Mormon somehow lessens or denies grace because it requires followers to do all the works they can do before grace can save. But what Nephi is actually writing here is a very Pauline-like statement to his children and brethren that even after all they can do under the law of Moses, which they must still obey because it has been commanded of them and is part of their covenant relationship to God, it is only the grace of Christ, not that law, that can save.

Likening 2 Nephi 25:23

Since Jesus Christ has already fulfilled the law of Moses, what does 2 Nephi 25:23 have to do with us today? If we follow Nephi’s example (see 1 Nephi 19:23) and liken this verse to ourselves, thereby removing it from its original context, we can draw interpretations on the relationship between grace and our works based on this verse. For example, many draw analogies between our repentance and reliance on the merits of Christ to the statement made by the Anti-Nephi-Lehies in Alma 24:11: “It has been all that we could do (as we were the most lost of all mankind) to repent of all our sins . . . , for it was all we could do to repent sufficiently before God that he would take away our stain.” So all we can do is repent. This is certainly consistent with Christ’s teachings in 3 Nephi that everyone must follow his new commandments and his doctrine to repent and be baptized (see 3 Nephi 11:32–33). What both of these instances indicate is an effort on our part to reconcile with God. The literal sense of reconcile is “to call back into union.”[12] This is certainly one of the aspects of the Atonement, to bring us back at one with God, so that we can be cleansed and made worthy of entering his presence.

Jacob, a likely source for Nephi’s teaching in 25:23 as argued by Joseph Spencer, taught the principle of reconciliation in 2 Nephi 10: “Wherefore, my beloved brethren, reconcile yourselves to the will of God, and not to the will of the devil and the flesh; and remember, after ye are reconciled unto God, that it is only in and through the grace of God that ye are saved” (2 Nephi 10:24). Note the use of “after” in this passage also. After being reconciled unto God we should remember that our efforts at reconciliation will not be the source of salvation, for it is only in and through the grace of God that we are saved; but the repeated invitation in scripture is to take that step to return and reconcile to God—that is all we can do. Since the fulfillment of the law of Moses by Jesus Christ, Christ has invited us to follow his law in order to receive salvation, so in this sense it is all we can do since our merits alone would not bring salvation.[13] Just as Nephi taught that they still kept the law of Moses because they were commanded to do so by the premortal Jehovah, likewise we do what we are commanded by the Savior in the post-Atonement conditions of salvation.

If I (or Nephi or Nephi’s readers) did nothing, could I be saved? Obviously I cannot presume to speak for what God could or would do in all cases; his power is great enough to do so. However, the Book of Mormon repeatedly teaches that we will not be saved in our sins, only from our sins, and wherever that notion appears, invitations to do something also appear. Thus I do not agree that Jacob or Nephi or others “[leave] no room for the idea that something of our own efforts plays a role in saving us,”[14] because if I do not do anything, then I am not being obedient to Christ’s invitations, thereby I remain in a wicked, unclean state.[15] Grace helps us turn to God and accept his invitations. Therefore, in that sense, grace is saving us because it is helping us along the way, but if it is only grace acting without any response on our part, then we have no agency in the process. When individuals are acted upon without first turning to God, such as Alma the Younger or Paul, it is a strong invitation to change course or they will be eternally destroyed. Despite the extreme act of grace of having this spiritual wake-up call, they then still had to do something to continue on the path of grace and salvation. Alone, we can never fully become worthy of reentering God’s presence, but we have been commanded to do something, and grace will bless our lives and natures all along the return path to God’s presence. If Jacob’s teachings in 2 Nephi 10 are a source for Nephi’s statement in chapter 25, it may be instructive to also see what Lehi, before his death, testified to Jacob earlier in 2 Nephi. Lehi did indeed teach that redemption comes in and through the Holy Messiah, “for he is full of grace and truth,” and because he offers himself as a sacrifice for sin, he answers “the ends of the law.” However, Lehi also emphasized that Jesus would only answer the ends of the law for those who have a broken heart and a contrite spirit: “And unto none else can the ends of the law be answered” (2 Nephi 2:6–7). So there’s a meeting point alluded to in Lehi’s testimony between his teaching that no flesh “can dwell in the presence of God, save it be through the merits, and mercy, and grace of the Holy Messiah” with the requirement that individuals humble themselves, show remorse, and believe in Christ: “They that believe in him shall be saved” (2 Nephi 2:8–9). Both Christ’s actions and our admittedly meager responses are essential for salvation and satisfying the demands of justice, even if grace helps one to reach the necessary faith and repentant condition in the first place and all along the way.

The third article of faith teaches that all mankind may be saved by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel. Because of Christ’s redemption, we are made free to choose good from evil and to act for ourselves and not to be acted upon (see 2 Nephi 2:26). Yet we have to make the choice, otherwise we risk being acted upon by the power of Satan. Lehi invited his sons in language similar to Jacob’s later teachings about avoiding the power of the devil and the flesh: “I would that ye should look to the great Mediator, and hearken unto his great commandments; and be faithful unto his words, and choose eternal life, according to the will of his Holy Spirit; And not choose eternal death, according to the will of the flesh and the evil which is therein, which giveth the spirit of the devil power to captivate, to bring you down to hell, that he may reign over you in his own kingdom” (2 Nephi 2:28–29).

Conclusion

As mentioned, exploring “all we can do today” is likening or making application of this passage from 2 Nephi 25:23, whereas its original sense and meaning point toward the relationship between grace and the law of Moses. It seems in Nephi’s closing words of counsel before his death, he wanted to go beyond the law of Moses but was restrained: “This is the doctrine of Christ, and there will be no more doctrine given until after he shall manifest himself unto you in the flesh. And when he shall manifest himself unto you in the flesh, the things which he shall say unto you shall ye observe to do. And now I, Nephi, cannot say more; the Spirit stoppeth mine utterance, and I am left to mourn because of the unbelief, and the wickedness, and the ignorance, and the stiffneckedness of men” (2 Nephi 32:6–7; emphasis added). Thus Nephi is reminded that what he already has is all that he and his descendants can do until after Christ appears to them and gives them further doctrine and commandments. They needed to remain obedient to the law given them, and while doing all they could do to reconcile themselves to God, they had to remain humble enough to always remember that undoubtedly salvation came from grace through Christ.

Notes

[1] Joseph M. Spencer, “What Can We Do? Reflections on 2 Nephi 25:23,” Religious Educator 15, no. 2 (2014): 25–39.

[2] Spencer, “What Can We Do?,” 29.

[3] Brad Wilcox’s oft-cited devotional address on grace shares examples of this common perspective, see “His Grace Is Sufficient,” Brigham Young University 2011–2012 Speeches (Provo, UT: Brigham Young University, 2012), 1–2, 5.

[4] Stephen E. Robinson, Believing Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992), 91–92.

[5] As Brad Wilcox has pointed out, we must be changed by grace, not just saved by grace. See Wilcox, “His Grace is Sufficient,” 3.

[6] “As these things are true” (2 Nephi 25:20).

[7] Joseph Spencer also connects being reconciled with God to “all we can do” by noting a structural parallel between Jacob’s teachings in 2 Nephi 10:24 and Nephi’s in 2 Nephi 25:23. See An Other Testament: On Typology (Salem, OR: Salt Press, 2012), 94.

[8] This is in agreement with Brant Gardner’s position in his commentary on this verse. “They should understand that their ultimate freedom from sin would come through the mission of the future Atoning Messiah. In the meantime, however, the sacrifices were required. These were ‘all they could do.’” Brant A. Gardner, Second Witness: Analytical and Contextual Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 2, 2 Nephi–Jacob (Salt Lake City: Greg Kofford Books, 2007), 343.

[9] The similarities between Nephi’s and Paul’s thoughts on the relationship of the law to Christ can be due to the similar Jewish background out of which they both originated. They were both observers of the law and then gained greater insight on the law’s relationship to Christ’s mission. In Paul’s case, after gaining knowledge of Christ through his conversion experience, he was no longer bound under the law due to Christ’s fulfillment of it; but in Nephi’s case, he continued to live under the law despite his better understanding of its purpose.

[10] It may be analogous to how many early Christians lived and taught (and how some contemporary Christians continue to believe): they knew Jesus had come as the Messiah, but not everything had changed or was accomplished with his divine mission. Thus they were still living in “this world” but looking forward to “the world to come,” when Christ would return and fulfill all that he was supposed to do. Their belief and faith changed with his first coming and affected how they lived, even though they awaited the complete fulfillment of Christ’s mission.

[11] Brant Gardner believes Nephi’s statement in 25:23 reconciles the conflict the faithful Nephites faced juxtaposing their belief in Jesus as the Messiah with Mosaic traditions. Gardner, Second Witness, 343.

[12] Noah Webster’s 1828 American Dictionary of the English Language, s.v. “reconcile.”

[13] Compare with Elder Oaks’s statement on this principle: “Because of what He accomplished by His atoning sacrifice, Jesus Christ has the power to prescribe the conditions we must fulfill to qualify for the blessings of His Atonement. That is why we have commandments and ordinances. That is why we make covenants. That is how we qualify for the promised blessings. They all come through the mercy and grace of the Holy One of Israel, ‘after all we can do”’ (2 Nephi 25:23). From “Two Lines of Communication,” Ensign, November 2010, 84. See also his earlier statement: “Some Christians accuse Latter-day Saints who give this answer of denying the grace of God through claiming they can earn their own salvation. We answer this accusation with the words of two Book of Mormon prophets. Nephi taught, ‘For we labor diligently . . . to persuade our children . . . to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God; for we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do’ (2 Ne. 25:23). And what is ‘all we can do’? It surely includes repentance (see Alma 24:11) and baptism, keeping the commandments, and enduring to the end. Moroni pleaded, ‘Yea, come unto Christ, and be perfected in him, and deny yourselves of all ungodliness; and if ye shall deny yourselves of all ungodliness, and love God with all your might, mind and strength, then is his grace sufficient for you, that by his grace ye may be perfect in Christ’ (Moro. 10:32). We are not saved in our sins, as by being unconditionally saved through confessing Christ and then, inevitably, committing sins in our remaining lives (see Alma 11:36–37). We are saved from our sins (see Hel. 5:10) by a weekly renewal of our repentance and cleansing through the grace of God and His blessed plan of salvation (see 3 Ne. 9:20–22).” From “Have You Been Saved?,” Ensign, May 1998, 56.

[14] Spencer, “What Can We Do?,” 31.

[15] Spencer does hold out the possibility, more in 2 Nephi 25:23 than in 2 Nephi 10:24, that human efforts can mobilize grace, but his emphasis is that grace does the actual saving (see “What Can We Do?,” 28). I could not agree more, but God does not force salvation upon us, so there seems to be the need for us to do something to come unto Christ in order to be saved. Thus grace saves, but only when we allow it. Some of it may be a question of semantics: What do we mean when we use the term salvation? While some may use it in the sense of general salvation from sin and death, others may be focusing on individual redemption. Ultimately, these two perspectives merge since an individual will only be saved from sin if they accept Christ, who has paid for sin. So even though Jesus has already paid the price, it is not a fait accompli for the individual unless the gift is accepted. Gerald Lund has also carefully pointed out a common misinterpretation of “salvation” as having to do with Christ’s unconditional blessing of resurrection, while only “exaltation” is living in the presence of God (conditional). However, the scriptures (e.g., D&C 6:13) usually use these terms synonymously. See Gerald N. Lund, “The Way Is Prepared from the Fall of Man, and Salvation Is Free,” in Jesus Christ, Key to the Plan of Salvation (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1991), 92.
==============================================================================
About the Interview: Daniel O. McClellan won the Best Student Paper Award at the 2nd Annual Book of Mormon Studies Association conference for his paper on the linguistic and rhetorical contexts of 2 Nephi 25:23.

In his work as a translation coordinator for the Church, he noticed that there were inconsistencies in the translation of this verse that led to misunderstandings. This finding led him to get to the roots of the phrase by studying the historical context of the reading. His research provides persuasive arguments to an interpretation of grace that clears up common misunderstandings of Restoration theology.

In her interview, Laura Harris Hales also discusses “As Far As It Is Translated Correctly” published in the Religious Educator and “The Use of the Old Testament in the New Testament” from Lincoln Blumell’s anthology on the New Testament, which provide valuable contexts and insights into the translation process.

About Our Guest: Daniel O. McClellan received his bachelor’s degree from Brigham Young University in ancient Near Eastern studies, where he focused on Biblical Hebrew and minored in Classical Greek. He completed a master of studies in Jewish studies at the University of Oxford in July of 2010 and a master of arts in biblical studies at Trinity Western University just outside of Vancouver, BC. He is currently a PhD candidate at the University of Exeter. His areas of specialization are Second Temple Judaism, early Israelite religion, textual criticism of the Hebrew Bible, and cognitive interpretation of scripture.

 

Transcript: The following has been provided by LDS Perspectives and is an unedited computer-generated transcript — and thus errors are to be expected.

Laura Harris Hales: This is Laura Harris Hales and I’m here today with Daniel O McClellan. I’m going to introduce you to the topic of our interview a little bit differently this time. A little bit of mystery here just for fun, but first I want to tell you a little bit about Daniel’s educational background. He received his bachelor’s degree from Brigham young university in ancient near Eastern studies where he focused on biblical Hebrew and minored in classical Greek. He completed a master of studies and Jewish studies at the university of Oxford in July of 2010 and a master of arts in biblical studies at Trinity Western university just outside of Vancouver, BC. Dan is currently a PhD candidate at the university of Exeter. His areas of specialization are second temple Judaism, early Israelite religion and textual criticism of the Hebrew Bible. Currently he’s working on a dissertation on the cognitive science of religion. Now that I’ve gotten that out of the way, Daniel, tell us a little bit about what you do professionally. Of course.
Daniel O McClellan: So for about the last seven years now, I’ve been working as a scripture translation supervisor here at the church and that’s in the sacred materials translation section. And so we’re responsible for all the translation of temple materials of scripture and of what we call core music, which is a hymn books and children’s song books. So not the, the songs that come out in the, in the friend or the Leah Hona, but the hymns and children’s songs. And my responsibility is basically to go out and find once a translation project has been approved, I go out and find a translators, I interview them, I pick my team, go out and train them. And then I supervise the project, which for a scripture project, a book of Mormon takes about four and a half years to translate. Uh, and if we’re doing the whole triple combination of the scriptures, a can be as much as twice that. And we’re also working on some, uh, updates to Bibles now so that we can produce more Bibles like we did with the Spanish and the Portuguese. In 2009 we published a church edition of the Bible in Spanish. And in 2015 we published one in Portuguese and that was my project, one that I was very proud of. Uh, and so we’re trying to find ways to, to extend the blessings of, uh, of having a church Bible published in other languages as well.
Laura Harris Hales: That’s fascinating. I’ve spoken with you just casually about your job quite a bit and the exciting opportunities you have to travel all over the world, like to Reykjavik and you said and Iowa, so it’s all over the place that you’re traveling with this project. Some locations more glamorous than others.
Daniel O McClellan: Yeah, I get a lot of, uh, I get a lot of offers to carry my luggage for me. When I say I’m headed to the South Pacific, which sounds a lot more glamorous than than it is because while, while I have been to places like Tahiti, uh, normally when I’m going to the South Pacific, it’s to an Island like yap or pawn pay, which I didn’t even know existed before. They said book a flight. And so these are, are much smaller out of the way places where there aren’t a lot of tourists and they’re, they’re not there for a reason. Uh, but there are wonderful people. They’re wonderful members of the church. I, I find out about new languages when I go out there. Uh, I find out about, uh, how the church functions in, in these tiny little places. And then when I get to go to places like Des Moines and, uh, st Paul, uh, for those projects, I was working in a language called [inaudible], which is spoken by refugees from Myanmar. And so while I am, uh, in a, a familiar place, a town in the United States, I’m working with a refugee community speaking a language that is very unique, that has a, it borrows the Burmese script, which is quite difficult to learn and uh, and pretty intimidating. And so it is, it’s still a unique experience. Even if I do stop at taco bell for dinner,
Laura Harris Hales: a lot of times when I interview people, they’re either full time academics or they’re, they have a full time job and just do academics on the side. Today. It’s kind of interesting cause we’re going to talk about how your academic life intersected with your day job and produce some really wonderful scholarship. I was privileged to hear a presentation you gave at the second annual book of Mormon studies association conference in Logan, Utah where you congratulations, won the best student paper award. The subject of the paper is the topic of this podcast, but also we’re going to talk about some background material that’s contained in two other articles that you published. One is called as far as it is translated correctly [inaudible] and that was published in the religious educator in 2019 and the other is a book chapter from Lincoln blue males anthology on the new Testament entitled the of the old Testament in the new Testament. We will start our discussion today with your article from the religious educator as far as it is translated correctly, Bible translation and the church. In that you talked about the linguistic context of the King James version as it relates to our understanding of biblical writings. I want to start with this quote from the beginning of your article. If the book of Mormon is the Keystone of our religion, the King James version of the Bible is certainly it’s linguistic cornerstone. What did you mean by that statement?
Daniel O McClellan: Well, there I was trying to address the fact that a lot of the book of Mormon, a lot of the writings that come out of that period by the prophet and by others are couched in KJ V type language. And this is a product of a long historical development. Uh, this, I think the second great awakening took place primarily in, in regions around where Joseph Smith was growing up. Uh, I think in fact, Pao Myra is in one of what they called the burned over districts because of this resurgence of spiritualism and, uh, the restoration movement. And as a result of that resurgence, there was also increased interest in antiquarian aneurysm in older things. And so the King James version of the Bible being a, a very old, uh, very venerable, uh, document was, uh, became more popular. Uh, and the language that was found in it became a part of the lexicon, uh, for people in that time period. And so Joseph Smith would have grown up using a lot of the terms and hearing a lot of the terms in his community that came from the King James version and so his couching of the book of Mormon and other revelations and other writings with based on the kind of a linguistic environment of that place in that time period, which was very much based on the King James version.
Laura Harris Hales: I think sometimes we’ve failed to appreciate how much the Bible infused itself into the culture of 19th century America. I was reading a book where it said that the parents would even talk to their children and that type of very formal language, get the body out of bed and take myself to school where we would just say, get out of bed now. Get to school.
Daniel O McClellan: Yeah. Most people these days didn’t grow up in a situation like the one Joseph Smith grew up in and a lot of that has to do with the fact that English has changed quite a bit since then. It’s, there’s a lot more variability in the language and some of that has to do with the fact that books like the King James version don’t exercise as much authority as they used to. Uh, the 20th century saw an explosion in new of the Bible. And so there are a lot more options out there. There are a lot of people using other translations of the Bible and as a result, we don’t have near as many people using the King James version to frame all the, all these discussions. And we also have much, the, our communities have changed quite a bit as well. There are large cities all over the place. We have suburban communities now. It’s not quite the same makeup that, uh, it was in the early 19th century.
Laura Harris Hales: So as you go about doing your business of making available translations of the Bible and the book of Mormon and languages for a worldwide church, this is not just an academic endeavor to say, Hey, this language is throughout this book of Mormon. This reliance creates problems for you and your translation teams as you try to translate materials. What kind of problems does that create?
Daniel O McClellan: Well, right off the bat we have a about, I want to S I haven’t looked at the numbers in a while, but I think we have about 96 or 97 what we call preferred translations of the Bible. And what that means is that we’ve evaluated available Bibles in a given language and we’ve designated one is the one that we prefer. Meaning that’s what we’ll use when we translate, uh, quotations of the Bible in general conference or things like that. And right now we actually have on our estimations, have more people accessing the Bible in a language other than English in the church than are accessing the Bible in English in the church. And so as you can imagine, that’s a lot of different translations of the Bible. But most of the material that we produce, we produce in English and we produce based on the King James version.
Daniel O McClellan: So when it goes out to be translated and some documents are translated in only a couple of languages, summer are translated into dozens of languages. Immediately, we’re going to run into issues where other translations are going to say different things. And we have a process in place that helps translators know what to do normally. For instance, if, if the message we’re trying to get across isn’t communicated by their preferred translation of the Bible, they’re instructed to translate the English and then either remove the quotation marks or in parentheses comment that this is according to the English translation of the Bible or something like that. Uh, but sometimes things happen where, uh, they don’t have any guidance and they’re on their own. And so there’s quite a bit of variability if you compared all of the different translations of a given document that the church sent out from headquarters. Uh, there’s going to be a lot of variability in the messages that the members are hearing. And so that’s one of the concerns that we have for consistency, uh, across, uh, the different languages in which the church operates.
Laura Harris Hales: So would you say the point of tension is really not in a certain piece of educational material that’s written in modern English, but rather when they refer to a scripture from the King James version, you’re not going to translate that word for word and to the next language. You’re going to take that out of that languages preferred translation of the Bible, put it in there and then maybe it’ll have a little bit different meaning. Is that what you’re telling me?
Daniel O McClellan: So the, the first option, the, the preferred option is to go to that other translation of the Bible and pluck that, that a verse out of there and, and use it. Obviously it has to work in order for us to use it. And so if the translation says something different than the translators or are faced with some of these other options, uh, either just translating the English of their source text straight across, uh, and sometimes they will identify this as a translation from the King James version. Sometimes they won’t. Sometimes they will remove the quotation marks. So it’s not even clear that it’s a quotation from the Bible. There are a variety of options that they have. But yeah, it does. It does. Uh, sometimes create confusion cause sometimes they will just pull it right out of their preferred translation and use it as it stands even though it may not support the message that’s being communicated. And that causes confusion as well.
Laura Harris Hales: Now when you go about translating materials, there is pedagogy and a science to this, like all translators. You need to make choices based on your audience because conveying the thoughts of one language into the words of another is not a seamless process. We all know that some things just don’t translate the same, especially when you’re trying to do word for word. Will you share a time when this obstacle created missed understandings and conflict and translated church materials? Sure.
Daniel O McClellan: Like I said, we have a process to try to minimize the, those misunderstandings and conflicts, but they still pop up from time to time. Uh, and in the article I share an example from a 2018 ministering principles article that’s quoted Jude one 22 from the new Testament. And the, the, the ministering principle article was about ministering with compassion, uh, and it opened up by saying as you minister as a savior would with compassion, you will find that you can make a difference in other’s lives. And then quotes Jude one 22 which says of some have compassion making a difference. And so it’s understanding making a difference here to mean exercising a positive influence on someone’s life. And it’s a direct quote from the King James version of Jude one 22. The problem is that there are two problems with, with that use of that quotation.
Daniel O McClellan: The first is that that’s not what the King James version means because it’s using that phrase, making a difference to mean exercising discernment. That’s what the phrase meant in the 17th century when the Bible was published, it did not mean having a positive influence until the early 20th century. And so other translations of the Bible that follow the King James versions understanding of the text are going to say something different. They’re going to say of some have compassion but exercise discernment or something like that. There’s going to be misunderstanding in that regard. The other issue is that there is some, some, a textual problem with the source texts that the King James version went with. And the tech should actually say something, uh, more like have some ha or have compassion on those who doubt. So a lot of contemporary Bible translations are going to use that rendering.
Daniel O McClellan: So when this went out to the dozens of translators who were responsible for translating this message, they all open their preferred Bibles and it said something entirely different. And so unfortunately, normally we would provide a translation guide note when there is potential for misunderstanding. But this was something that escaped everyone’s notice because the people who write those notes are, are usually not experts in Greek and textual criticism and things. And so they don’t pick up on stuff like that. So there were no guidance for the translators regarding what to do. And so everybody did whatever they thought was best. And so if you look at the many different translations of that ministering principles article, some people said according to the King James version, which is problematic in my opinion because it signals to people who are in the church, speaking of the languages that the King won, the King James version is best and to the English is preferred.
Daniel O McClellan: And that kind of creates a two tiered membership. And I have seen this inaction. It’s, it’s not just for English speakers. This is something that’s, that’s kind of hypothetical and philosophical, but I’ve seen people in tears because they don’t feel like, uh, that is appropriate. And so it would be great if we can produce the same experience for everybody, but there are just some obstacles when we’re producing our materials in English. And then as well there, there are a number of times when different people writing different materials for the church understand the text differently. So, uh, another example is from the DNC, a doctrine and covenants student. Now teacher manual for, uh, the gospel doctrine. Several years old, I think it was in the 80s that it was published. Uh, when you get to doctrine and covenants, one 21, verse 43, reproving betimes of sharpness when moved upon, um, and were moved upon by the Holy ghost.
Daniel O McClellan: Uh, in that manual, it says, the word sharpness does not mean severity, it clarity or specificity. The problem is we have instructions in our translation guys to have the translators understand it to mean severity. And so the manual, if it, when it gets translated into other languages, uh, teachers are going to say, okay, now class, we’re reading this in doctrine covenants, in whatever language. And it doesn’t mean severity, it means clarity, even though their translation very clearly has, it means severity. Uh, and so there just some, some complications that, um, that arise because of a number of these factors. It’s a very large organization. Uh, there are a lot of people doing very good work that don’t all collaborate. They don’t know. Sometimes the left hand doesn’t know what the right hand is doing. Uh, and then going into many different languages just creates lots of complications.
Laura Harris Hales: Oh, I don’t even know how you would manage that. It’s such a bureaucratic, um, just huge undertaking considering all the different languages. I’m going to turn now to the chapter you wrote for Lincoln blue mal on the old Testament in the new Testament. And basically in that article you were looking at how the new Testament authors used familiar scripture to present their point to their audience. Correct. In there you mentioned what you thought the function of scripture was, which might sound like a really basic question, but I don’t think we sit down and think about it. We think, Oh, it’s the word of God, but you, uh, in your academic life it’s very crucial to have a definition of that.
Daniel O McClellan: Uh, yeah, that’s absolutely true. And I think that we don’t talk enough about what it means for things to be scripture and how scripture is supposed to function. Uh, we kind of engage with it just with some kind of intuitive understanding of how to do it and I think we’d be much more effective at it if we took the time to talk about what it means for things to be scripture and what the function of scripture is. Uh, there, there is not really a definition anywhere in, in that article. I, um, riffing off of the notion that a remember is the most important word in the dictionary, which I think is, uh, some expensive. W Kimball said, uh, I’ve, I’ve heard it taught before that remembers the most important word in the scriptures. And I think there’s a great deal of truth to that. Uh, but I say that if that’s the case, then one of the most important functions of scripture is to serve as a repository for social memory, uh, which is the shared understanding a group has of its collective past and its identity.
Daniel O McClellan: And what I was trying to strike out there was the, the fact that scripture is primarily a serves a communal function. It helps to bring a social group together and it helps to forge a shared identity, a shared understanding of our past, a shared understanding of our responsibilities to each other now and our responsibilities to God. And then a shared understanding of where things are going. Uh, and I talk a little bit about social memory. I think that’s a, that’s a very important approach to literature and particularly scripture that’s, uh, a lot of people have been working with for the last a few decades. And really this is about how groups negotiate between their past and their needs in the present. Because no one, no one understands their past, completely divorced from where they are now and what needs they have now. Uh, and because those needs and contexts are always changing, we’re always having to renegotiate between the two.
Daniel O McClellan: And I think scripture does that in a lot of ways. Uh, and the new Testament is looking back on the old Testament. So every time the new Testament interprets the old Testament, it’s engaging in that renegotiation. It’s saying this is how this text brings meaning to our identities now. Uh, and so I think if we, if we can look at scripture that way, it might help us better understand why it is that we apply scripture the way we do today. Uh, it might help us, uh, apply it better. Um, and I think it will help us be better students of the scriptures and find a lot more insight. And a lot more inspiration, um, in them. Some people think of it as kind of a naturalistic approach that it robs it of, uh, of the spirit of scripture. But, uh, I don’t think that’s true at all. I think we should be using all the tools, uh, that are available to us in order to get a better understanding of what it is that, uh, that God wants from us.
Laura Harris Hales: And we see the use, um, of, of mythmaking and our secular lives as well as a common reference point. I was reading a newspaper the other day and there was this question that said, what would the founders have done? And I thought, Oh my gosh, the founders died how many years ago? And we still care, but, but this is what your article is about. So what would the old Testament prophets have done? That’s what the new Testament writers are saying. Okay, this happened in the past. How do we apply it to our present? How do we bring that social memory together?
Daniel O McClellan: Yeah. I, and I think a good example is in, is in Matthew 13, when, uh, the scribes come to try to challenge Jesus, uh, and he responds to them, go you and learn what that mean, if I will have mercy and not sacrifice. And so he’s, uh, he’s quoting Hosea six, six, and he’s kind of throwing it in the face of the people who are the professional interpreters of scripture and saying, you don’t understand your own scriptures. Go learn what this means because he was talking about you. Uh, and so there are a number of examples of that. And I, I think we tend to think of the, the scriptures as something that was meant directly for us when usually it’s primarily meant for other readers who are, are long gone. And so we do have to apply our own lenses anytime that we try to apply it to our own day. Not that that’s a bad thing. Um, it’s inevitable. We can’t get away from that, but I think we should be aware of it.
Laura Harris Hales: What we’re talking about is scripture fulfilling rhetorical goals. It wants to teach. It wants to argue a concept. How does scripture use language to fulfill rhetorical goals?
Daniel O McClellan: Well, that’s an interesting question. There’s a cause it has so many dimensions. For instance, uh, uh, language develop not primarily as a means of conveying information but primarily as a means of forging social relationships. Uh, and what, uh, some anthropologists will call pro sociality, uh, or producing cohesion in a soap social group. So it doesn’t break up. When you think about the, the basic fundamental function of language as producing social cohesion. Well it makes it interesting to think about how does do the rhetorical functions of scripture serve that goal. And I think a lot of scripture is precisely aimed at trying to bring groups together, trying to make people more faithful members of that group, trying to advance the interests of that group. Uh, trying to forge a shared identity and, and all these things that, um, we talked about earlier and it does so by using conventions that people are familiar with, largely making the text resonates with people, making them feel like they’re a part of this.
Daniel O McClellan: And so if it brings up experiences that they’ve had before, they can identify with it. If it uses terminology and, and phrase ology that they are specifically familiar with and used to hearing, it will make it feel like this is, this is meant for me. Uh, and so there, there are a lot of the imagery that the scriptures use, uh, generally try to forge this kind of link between the sacred past and us and it invites the reader to become a part of that grand macro narrative to find their place within the narrative that’s being unfolded in the scriptures.
Laura Harris Hales: You take this concept to the book of Mormon and you refer to a very familiar scripture in first new fi where he talks about likening scriptures. How is likening like Niffin structs an ongoing process for generations of scripture readers.
Daniel O McClellan: Like I said, I think one of the things that the scriptures do is invite us to find our place in this narrative. And so likening the scriptures under us is one of the more explicit ways that, uh, the scriptures invite us to do that. I also said every engagement with the scriptures is a renegotiation between the sacred past and the needs of the present. And so because those needs change from day to day and from person to person, everyone is going to like it in a different way and every generation is going to like it in a different way. So a good example of this, it’s not uniquely related to the church of Jesus Christ of latter day saints is probably the use of the Bible by both sides of the slavery argument during the civil war, both abolitionists and pro slavery, uh, dogmatists appealed to the Bible to defend their side. And so what they were both doing was taking this text and thinking, how am I going to apply this to the rhetorical need that I have right now? And you can find arguments from both sides. Um, if you are applying that lens. And so every generation is going to have different needs and every generation is going to approach the scriptures differently.
Laura Harris Hales: With that very brief background and the hatchet job that I just did on revealing those two articles, let’s talk about the subject of your dress at the book of Mormon studies association. Your paper centered on the linguistic and rhetorical contexts of toony Phi 25 23 which is very familiar to all of us. But again, before we discuss your research, I want to talk about the motivations behind your study. Let’s go back to what you do as a day job, which is a translation coordinator for the church. What problem arose that prompted you to look closer at possible meanings for this verse in the book of Mormon,
Daniel O McClellan: so 25 25 23 says, for we labored diligently to write, to persuade our children and also our brethren, to believe in Christ and to be reconciled to God for we know that it is by grace that we are saved after all we can do.
Daniel O McClellan: What usually happens in instances like this is we have translators working closely on the text and they’ll have a question and our translation guide may not address it or they may not feel it addresses it adequately. And so we spend a lot of time addressing these questions. It may be a word that could mean two different things and in their language they have one word for one thing and one for the other and they can’t preserve both meanings. And so they come and say, which of these two meanings should I give priority to? Uh, in this instance there is, there is note that explains that people should understand after all, we can do two main following in time. And we had a number of translators, not just translators I was supervising, but translators that uh, other supervisors were in charge of who were uncomfortable with that because it didn’t make sense to them in the context. And that’s not how they understood the English. But as non native speakers of English, they generally defer to us. So I decided I would do some, some deeper research to see if I could shed any additional light on the meaning of this passage, either to help the translators have more confidence in what the translation guide notes said or to suggest that maybe we revise this translation guide note, which happens from time to time.
Laura Harris Hales: You began your paper with a thought provoking statement that I’m going to read to you and then have you comment on texts after all have no inherent meaning. Meaning is created as readers impose interpretive frameworks based on their own experiences with an understandings of the conventions and patterns of language. First, as an English teacher and an editor, I have to ask you, what was your use of after all intentional? It was intentional because it was brilliant. I’m glad somebody picked up on that. Second, do you think this concept is a general Lee held belief in the church? I don’t think it is.
Daniel O McClellan: I’ve tried to share it, uh, on a number of different occasions and I’m generally met with deer in the headlights kind of look or people who disagree entirely. But the fact is that there, there is no meaning that inhabits the ink that sits on a page or the pixels on a screen. Uh, it all is inside our heads. And our job is to try to take what we know about the conventions of language, about the context, about the person with whom we’re speaking or the person that wrote the text and try to, uh, reconstitute that meaning in our heads. And this is precisely why people misunderstand each other. My wife and I misunderstand each other all the time, even when we’re using very simple words. And that’s because the words of the language are not exact matches to the concepts that are in our heads.
Daniel O McClellan: They are approximations sometimes close, sometimes not very close approximations, but they’re the tools that we use to try to take something that is a morphous and unseeable that’s inside our head and try to communicate it. And it is not an exact science, which is why people constantly are fumbling over how to say what they need to say. And, uh, and, and I think that’s a concept that is challenging for some people because it’s not incredibly intuitive and it’s not how we think and talk about language and it’s, and so it’s difficult. I think the better we understand that principle, uh, the better communicators we can become and hopefully the better interpreters of texts like the scriptures.
Laura Harris Hales: So as you sat down, okay, you realize there’s a problem here with this scripture, it’s not the first time that you encountered that scripture and realized that she had a different interpretation. Probably even the person sitting next to you, did it intimidate you at all that you were looking at this scripture that is probably the single most influential scripture in creating tension between us and other Protestants in the United States as far as our beliefs and our consideration of being Christians. It’s, I mean, this is a lofty goal. You’re like, I’m going to look at this phrase and like make a cogent argument with an open mind. I’m going to take an academic approach and see once and for all, what does this phrase mean?
Daniel O McClellan: Yeah. And that’s, and you know, what does this phrase mean is a question that sometimes is, is just simply impossible to answer. And so I recognize that that’s a possibility, but it’s what I’ve been doing, uh, for a living for several years now. And so, uh, I don’t, I wouldn’t say I was intimidated. I was actually kind of excited because I, it was a question that has always been kind of pinned on the board that I had never taken down before and really look closely at. But now I had an opportunity to, uh, and an excuse to, and so, uh, I would say I was more excited than anything else. I’m familiar with the, the long debate about grace versus works and I would like latter day saints to be more informed and more engaged participants in that debate because I think we tend to tow a rather dogmatic line without thinking hard about, about the issues and without taking seriously what we’re hearing from the other side.
Laura Harris Hales: Going back to what you said where I said what does this phrase mean in your article? You do break out different meanings for the phrase. And you start, before you even talk about the linguistic and rhetorical elements of that phrase, you look at it’s historical and theological analysis in the church. Can you briefly summarize what you found for us before we go on?
Daniel O McClellan: Well, I think, uh, it wasn’t, it’s not an incredibly complex history. Uh, we have long used the, uh, the passage as a kind of proof text for the notion that we do have work to do in this question of salvation. It’s not arbitrary, it’s not free grace. And, uh, I think this is primarily been a part of our identity politics are competition, uh, with other faith communities that feel differently about this. And as I went back and looked in the record, I couldn’t find any direct engagement with this passage and that reading of this passage in, uh, the writings of the prophet Joseph Smith or Brigham young, I think addresses it briefly, but, but not very thoroughly. But I was able to find discussions as we move into the 20th century. And as I think the church began to engage a lot more directly with Protestantism and particularly evangelical Protestantism, and it became more of a, an ideological battleground that we start to see more explicit discussions.
Daniel O McClellan: And for the most part, leaders in the church sided with, uh, the traditional reading that we are saved by grace after we have done everything that we can. And I think that that started to change, uh, in the late 20th century. I know Spencer Flaman, uh, attribute to that, to Ezra Taft Benson’s emphasis on the book of Mormon. If you spend more time in the book of Mormon, you can’t help but grapple with the concept of grace that is all over the book. And so he says that, uh, that, uh, president Benson, uh, kind of a woke concern for grace and that forced us to, to address these things and then we get, uh, into the 1980s and nineties, and we have some, not necessarily leaders at first, but scholars in the church, Stephen Robinson and others who begin to challenge the traditional reading. Uh, and then we have a president Oop Dorf later on, uh, in his famous general conference address on grace, uh, softening, uh, the, the churches, uh, interpretation of the passage in a way that I think opened the door for people to look at it a new and reconsider what it means.
Laura Harris Hales: Oh, I loved what you said about some really recent research by Jared Ludlow as well that helped maybe to steer the discussion a little bit away from contemporary views of the scripture to contextual within the book of Mormon taxed. What did, what did, uh, dr Ludlow say?
Daniel O McClellan: So, uh, yeah, Jared tries to understand this in the context of the book of Mormon and I think what he’s doing here is trying to remove it from the context of what does this mean in regards to our competition with, with evangelical Christianity. And so trying to pull some of the identity politics out of his examination, uh, and he understands all we can do to refer to all the commandments of the law of Moses who refer, uh, that [inaudible] is using that phrase to refer to obedience to the law of Moses. While it in effect and there is some discussion elsewhere about this law of Moses and he uses that as the antecedent to, to understand this passage, which I think is a creative reading. And I don’t say that negatively. Sometimes I say somethings creative as a witness, you’re, you’re dreaming. But I’m, no, I think that’s, that’s a very good use of the scripture to try and understand something difficult contextually rather than how, what does this mean to our group today in relation to other groups?
Laura Harris Hales: Theological analysis does a certain job for a community and that job is to maybe set itself apart or define beliefs, set parameters. How does a literary rhetorical and historical analysis fulfill a different job?
Daniel O McClellan: Well, similar to [inaudible] dr Ludlow did. Uh, I think when we look at it literarily or rhetorically, we’re trying to move away from some of those other contexts that that might influence us in a different direction and try to ask different questions of the texts. Questions about what is the literary genre, for instance, that this text is appealing to all texts, how the genre and they help us understand them. And if we don’t pay attention to the genre, we may lose what the intended meaning is. A rhetorical examination wants to find out what was the intended function of this text? How did the author want or, or even publisher for that matter, uh, want this text to function. Uh, we’re asking different questions and I think we only come to better understand a text by asking questions of it and then going and finding answers. Uh, and for some people, certain questions are gonna, uh, produce better answers than others
Laura Harris Hales: because of the unique nature of the authorship of a book of Mormon. And that’s kind of an understatement. It poses an exceptional challenge to analysis of its writing style. So how do you deal with that situation in your study?
Daniel O McClellan: In the work that I do, we try to help translators preserve some of these elements of Hebraic structures and things like that that are considered evidences of antiquity in the texts so that a reader reading in another language can still have that same experience and still recognize the source of the text. But at the same time it’s not Hebraic all the way through. A lot of it is a thoroughly, thoroughly 19th century English and in reality if anybody is going to understand the English translation, that translation has to reflect their contemporary contexts. If we bracket the question of the source of the source texts that Joseph Smith translated, Joseph Smith’s translation has to function in a specific context and if it is native to that context that maximizes its functionality. In other words, if you take Shakespeare and you put it in a middle school classroom or even even a college classroom, there are going to be a lot of misunderstandings and we already talked about that just in the King James version, Jude one 22 there was a phrase making a difference that was misunderstood because we were applying a 20th century understanding of that phrase.
Daniel O McClellan: If you take Shakespeare out of its native context and you put it somewhere else, there’s going to be a lot of misunderstanding and so my assumption is that whatever the ultimate source of the rendering that we have and the 1830 edition of the book of Mormon, it was intended for an 1830 audience. Primarily. There can be other intended audiences as well, but it is primarily intended for that audience and so I have to assume that whatever is in there is going to follow the conventions of that time period and this has no bearing whatsoever on whether or not the source text is ancient or modern. So I’m not even addressing that question. I’m just saying if I want to understand what this English text that was written down in 1830 means I have to understand how texts in that time period function it. I think it would be nonsense for a phrase that was common in a given time period to be translated into a text in that time period, but in with an opposite meaning or a different meaning intended. In other words, the translation was intended to be understood by the audience into which it was published. And so, and that requires that they apply the conventions and the literary, uh, tropes and all of the, uh, imagery and all of the symbols that were in common use in that time period.
Laura Harris Hales: So you went about looking at the writings of the time period. The first place you looked at was the contemporary dictionary. What did you find?
Daniel O McClellan: Not much help. So, uh, you can find after, and you can find the phrase after all and after all has a related sense but not the exact same sense as this phrase. After all we can do. And so dictionaries were of limited help. But also I’m not a huge fan of dictionaries because they take terms that can mean all kinds of different things and try to reduce them to the smallest set of necessary and sufficient features. And that’s just not how language works. And there are a number of other dynamics associated with why they pick the, the lists of features that they pick that just make dictionaries a starting point but not a, a terminating point. Every time I get into an argument with somebody on Twitter and they say, the dictionary says this, I remind them, dictionaries do not adjudicate meaning it’s just a starting point.
Laura Harris Hales: They don’t, and actually, um, we were having a discussion just within our household. Okay. We do have strange discussions at the dinner table, but from a linguistical point of view, if people are using a word a certain way, it doesn’t matter what the dictionary says. If five years later people are using it a different way, then that is a legitimate way to use that word. Yeah.
Daniel O McClellan: Yeah. And this is why codes work because you can say, I assign this semantic value to this letter, this word, this color, the shape, and you have communication and that’s all that that language does. Uh, but I think in our, in our modernist world, and by modernist, I mean, uh, more enlightenment era than, than 21st century era. We tend to think in binary, black and white terms about meaning and it’s just not how language works.
Laura Harris Hales: You next turn to the new Testament and also intertextual usage in the book of Mormon, of the concept of the unprofitable servant. How did that usage provide insight into the use of after all by Nifae?
Daniel O McClellan: Well, it actually, uh, I w I began to look into some of the contemporary literature from the 18th and 19th century where I could find this phrase after all we can do and variations on it. After all you can do, after all he can do, after all we can do, after all that we can do. Um, and I started to find this phrase unprofitable servant turning up, uh, in a couple of the places where it was used. And so I went back to, uh, it was most familiar to me from Moziah. And I imagine it’s most familiar to most latter day saints from Moziah to where the author says, I say unto you that if you should serve him who was created you from the beginning and is preserving you from day to day by lending you breath, that you may live and move and do according to your own will and even supporting you from one moment to another.
Daniel O McClellan: I say, if you should serve him with all your whole souls, yet he would be unprofitable servants. Now, these texts from the 18th century were not drawing from Mosiah too, though they were drawing from Luke 1710, which says, so likewise ye when he shall have done all those things which are commanded, you say, we are unprofitable servants. We have done that, which was our duty to do. And so I, I recognize that there’s a, uh, a relationship here. Masiah two agrees with, uh, the author of Luke 1710. Basically in this idea that even if we did everything we could possibly do, we are unprofitable servants. We’re not worthy. And this was what these texts that I was finding from the 18th and early 19th century were saying as well, but they were also using this phrase after all we can do in relation to it and so it just kind of light bulb went off that after all we can do seems to have a specific relationship with this concept of grace. And so I realized that there was a linguistic context that this came from. It was not just an incidental use of this phrase in the, in the context of grace,
Laura Harris Hales: after looking at the dictionary and scriptures, you turn to publications. This is where it became super interesting. You looked at people who are read widely, like the most widely read, people like Thomas Paine. What did you find?
Daniel O McClellan: What I found was that these authors were frequently using this phrase after all we can do or after all you can do or they can do in the context of discussions about grace and particularly defending the concept of grace against groups that they perceive to discount grace. So in the earliest literature there was a lot of anti deist rhetoric talking about how the [inaudible] thinks that they can work their way to salvation and all this and it would always come down to something along the lines of, but after all they can do, grace is still the answer. Something like that. And then into the 19th century, there was more anti-Catholic sentiment in these writings, but the, the concept always seemed to be that grace is what saves us. And then there was this phrase that kept turning up after all we can do, but I knew it does not mean that the way that we have traditionally understood it to mean because these are very, very Protestant authors writing very polemical texts aimed at precisely the kind of people that we are accused of being. And so I realized there was a disconnect between how they were using the phrase and how we traditionally understand it.
Laura Harris Hales: I always thought that it was really interesting. You looked at texts that weren’t even religious to see how after all was Yoast and it was clear there that it didn’t mean that you had to do something for something else to occur. Yeah,
Daniel O McClellan: so I pulled one of the examples from uh, an 18, 29 French grammar where it talks about how it labels a different nouns either with S, M or S, F and it reads the former means substantive or noun masculine and the latter substantive or noun feminine. And this, after all that grammarians can do after all the rules that they can give us is the only sure way of learning from books the gender of the French nouns. Now clearly what the author is trying to say is that there is no systematic way to learn the nouns. You just have to memorize this noun is masculine, this noun is feminine. And so the phrase after all that grammarians can do means in spite of all that grammarians can do after all the rules that they can give us or in spite of all the rules they can give us, the only sure way of learning is by memorization. And so I think this is a clear example of a non religious context where this phrase is being used to mean in spite of or despite,
Laura Harris Hales: okay we’re going to do a symbolic drum roll here now. So what did you say decide would be a appropriate synonym for the term after all in the context literarily and rhetorically that it’s used in second new fi.
Daniel O McClellan: I couldn’t find a single example in all the literature I looked at that had the phrase after all X can do that didn’t seem to mean or have to mean despite all X can do. And so I think that has to be the way this phrase would have been understood by someone living in the 18th century or the early 19th century. And I think the inescapable conclusion is that wherever that phrase came from, that was the intended meaning. In other words, second [inaudible] 25 23 ought to be understood to say four, we know that it is by grace that we are saved despite all we can do. In other words, I think it is, it is a pro grace statement. It is saying that grace is the only way, no matter what else you could ever possibly do
Laura Harris Hales: in coming to your conclusion, you favored literary usage over past the logical analysis saying our phrase can only be accurately interpreted according to its usage in those contexts, which is the clear and consistent interpretation to which early informed readers would have appealed. Why?
Daniel O McClellan: I think when we let theological analysis have priority, we’re often more concerned about the outcomes of the argument than about the, than about the merits of the argument. Uh, and so I prioritize literary analysis to just set everything else aside and just say from a purely literary linguistic point of view, how would this have been understood by someone who was completely unaware of all of the theological implications of their readings? Somebody in 1830 picks this up and reads this text and they have some literary chops. They’ve read stuff, they know what’s going on, how are they going to understand it? And I think this is the only way that they could understand it.
Laura Harris Hales: I’ve had quite a while to process your study and think about its implications. I wonder if you would be willing to venture into the speculation with me. Your argument is totally convincing, but so with Stephen Robinson’s, he sold 600,000 copies of believing Christ and Brad Wilcox has sold, I don’t know how many copies of his books on grace, very well written, very convincing. They’ve tackled the topic of the relationship of grace to salvation. Yet we still cannot in our social culture, dissolve the almost magnetic attraction of works to the discussion of salvation. We always need to tack on that, but you need the ordinances, but you need to endure to the end. It is the cautionary disclaimer attached to gospel packaging. I believe personally, I think this is because of the confusion between the concepts of salvation and Xcel. Tation within church pedagogy. What is your take?
Daniel O McClellan: We often talk about salvation, uh, including both justification and sanctification. But if we parse those apart, I think we get closer to what [inaudible] was talking about where he talks about reconciliation to God, which, which I believe is consonant with the biblical notion of justification, that this gets us through the gate and onto the path. And then exaltation is the end result of the rest of that life and that living. And I think because we are concerned with how does this sound in maybe a BYU classroom or how does this sound in a discussion with with an evangelical Christian or how does this sound in a gospel doctrine classroom. There are a lot of other dynamics that influence the words that we use in how we talk about them. But I think one of the benefits of trying to break it down and just ask how would this have been understood is to kind of cut through the, the Gordian knot of all these identity politics, uh, and all these vagaries of the language that we use. I don’t pretend to have all the answers to the question of the relationship of, of works to exaltation slash salvation, but I think if we can give more earnest heed to how people understood this when it was first published in 1830 how Joseph Smith would have understood it when people asked him questions about it. I think that is the best foundation on which to build a soteriology that we can carry with us through the context of the 21st century
Laura Harris Hales: and so teary ology is a doctrine of salvation, right? Correct. Thank you. Thank you for your time, Daniel. This has been a fascinating discussion. I love to all your articles. Are we ever going to see this paper and print? It is with the journal book of Mormon studies right now, so hopefully sometime before the millennium. Excellent. Hopefully in the 2020 issue it comes out about once a year, so we will look for it and I will put links to those other articles in the show notes. Thanks for your time. Thank you so much. I appreciate it. Bye.

This podcast is cross-posted with the permission of LDS Perspectives Podcast.
==============================================================================
ovenant, Law, Grace, Works, and Faith: Understanding the Contexts of Scripture (updated)
July 22, 2023 / benspackman
Let me open by saying that this is a wide-ranging and complex subject. I may well prove to be wrong on this or that point. I may be missing important nuances here or there, and it’s a bit scattered and repetitive. Let’s get those disclaimers out of the way and talk about this important subject.

Disclosure: I am an Amazon affiliate, and may receive payment from books purchased through the Amazon-linked book titles below.

Disclaimers aside, I have read some, and I think sharing it can help our Gospel Doctrine classes and in LDS discussion. Moreover, there is a variety of LDS views, and while I don’t necessarily endorse any of them, I wish Latter-day Saints to be aware of these ideas and discussions that are happening. There is much to read and explore on these points, and more informed discussion is better, more edifying discussion. Better doctrinal understanding leads to better discipleship, I firmly believe.

If you’re short on time, read the overview and bullet points. Otherwise, read the whole thing and note how the ideas are interrelated, and certain terms and ideas occur again and again.

Overview

New Testament Christianity began as a Jewish subgroup; most Christians were Jews who accepted Jesus as xristos, as the anointed messiah/christ. The primary difference between the two before they really split apart to become distinct religions was not something like “grace vs legalism.” Rather, both functioned more or less the same way, generally speaking: You enter into a covenant relationship with God, and the terms of the covenantal relationship were that God promised hugely disproportionate blessings in return for your covenantal loyalty and faithfulness.

The primary difference was how God’s grace was mediated, and the terms.

In Judaism, God’s grace was mediated through the Torah, and it was the Torah’s requirements/laws/rules that were the terms to be followed.

In Christianity, God’s grace was mediated through Jesus— not Torah— and it was the requirements/laws/rules of Jesus— not Torah— that set forth the terms to be followed. The New Testament  has nothing bad to say about “law” or “commandments” or “standards to be followed,”  per se, it just disagrees on which requirements/laws/rules are the ones through which God’s grace flows.

To restate, the main initial difference between Judaism and the Judaic schism which became NT Christianity was how it answered the question, “How do we access God’s grace?” For Judaism, it was through the Torah (KJV “law”). For Christianity, it was through Jesus.

the “legalistic” framework imposed on the Judaism of Paul’s day by Luther and his theological heirs has served to muddy the waters more than anything else. When read in their own context, the central issue of Paul’s polemical letters boils down to a simple choice: Christ or the Torah as the “gateway of salvation.”

–The New Perspective on Paul: An Introduction 102–103.

Both the Torah and Jesus made requirements on people; commandments, laws, regulations of discipleship, whatever term you like. Rules and regulations are not bad per se, in the New Testament. That view of the New Testament as fighting against Judaic/Old Testament “legalism” is largely a historical misunderstanding.

When Paul talked about grace and faith, he drew both on Old Testament concepts, but used terms drawn from the Greco-Roman concept of patron-client relationships. Much more on this below, but in essence, a poor client would go to a wealthy and powerful patron, who would solve the client’s problem out of the goodness of his heart. What the patron did for the client was Gr. xaris (pronounced CAR-iss with that c like the ch in Bach) “grace” and what the client owed the patron in return was Gr. pistis (pronounced PISS-tiss); pistis typically gets translated as “faith” but that is misleading; pistis in this context meant trust, loyalty, allegiance, faithfulness. When Paul uses “faith” he means something much different and broader than today.

 

What is Faith in the New Testament?

Words change meaning over time, and we read our scripture in translation, which adds another layer. Many of the words we use have been filtered through the English of Protestantism, which does not represent accurately what it meant in the New Testament period.Evangelical scholar Matthew Bates came to  recognize that his “ideas of faith, sin, repentance, works, “heaven,” the kingdom of God, and the like were constructed through sixteenth-century Protestant categories rather than first-century.” (This is typical for Protestants. They take Luther and Calvin’s 16th century interpretations for the original Biblical understandings.)

In his book Salvation by Allegiance Alone, Bates argues that “faith” (Gr. pistis) in the NT should often be understood or even translated as “allegiance.” Being “saved by faith,” then, would not mean “Salvation in return for intellectual acceptance of Jesus” but “salvation as part of a relationship which requires action,” i.e. allegiance. He makes this argument on the basis of linguistic context and contemporary usage.

In his autobiographical recounting of the events of the Jewish-Roman war in AD 66, [Josephus] reports an incident where he urged a rebel leader to “repent and believe in me,” using language nearly identical to what we find in the Gospel of Mark with respect to Jesus’s proclamation to “Repent and believe the good news” (Mark 1:15)… So, what “repent and believe [pisteuo, the verbal form of pistis] in me” means for Josephus in this context is “turn away from your present course of action and become loyal to me.

In a letter, King Ptolemy speaks of Jews installed in positions requiring pistis in the royal court (Ant. 12.47); King Antiochus praises the pistis of the Jews for their allegiance to him during a time of revolt (Ant. 12.147); pistis and the related verb pisteuō are used with reference to matters of sworn allegiance, loyal commitment, and treason in battle (Ant. 12.396)

This helps us make a good bit of sense of Ephesians 2:8 (“saved by charis through pistis”), Romans 3:3 (“the pistis of God”), and Romans 1:5 (“the obedience of pistis“)

What ties these all together is this: accepting Jesus as Patron (see below), King, Lord (Luke 6:46, Matt 7:21), Messiah. The usage of “Christ” repeatedly with Jesus in the NT is not a last name nor mere formality, but emphasizes this relational position. In other words, because we (as clients) enter into a relationship with God (as patron), he offers us charis or grace (salvation from sin and death), and in return we owe him pistis “faith/faithfulness, allegiance,” which includes doing erga “works”.

The offer of salvation is free, but it absolutely does come with strings attached. Obedient loyalty to the king is required as a condition of acceptance….the modern notion of the “pure gift” requiring no reciprocation… does not align with the ancient evidence pertaining to grace….we should not set grace at odds with the required behavioral changes (good deeds) associated with allegiant union to Jesus the king. In short, we cannot say in an unqualified fashion that final salvation is by grace and by faith apart from embodied obedience, for this misunderstands the nature of both charis (“grace”) and pistis (“faith”) in antiquity and in Paul’s Letters.

These quotes come from Bates, Salvation by Allegiance Alone: Rethinking Faith, Works, and the Gospel of Jesus the King 

What’s more, Latter-day Saints have inherited a worldview in which “faith” and “belief” are essentially internal, mental, intellectual. And so when pistis is only translated as “faith” or “belief/believe,” that misunderstanding gets reinforced.

 Luke Timothy Johnson makes the point that πίστις is often translated “faith” in English versions of the New Testament, but, in fact, the Greek word has a broad range of meaning that covers a wide spectrum: belief, trust, endurance, loyalty, obedience. When we translate πίστις only as “belief,” the polyvalent nature of the term is suppressed and the cognitive dimension often dominates.
-Gupta, Paul and the Language of Faith 

The “cognitive dimension” is that aspect of pistis which does represent what we think of as “belief” but it’s not the only, or even the most important aspect of that word!

Further information found below, and also in

Richards/O’Brien, Misreading Scripture with Western Eyes
DeSilva, Honor, Patronage, Kinship & Purity: Unlocking New Testament Culture 
Rohrbaugh, The New Testament in Cross-Cultural Perspective 
 

Grace is an LDS Concept Found in Our Own Scriptures; Protestantism doesn’t “own” it.

We often hear about 2 Nephi 25:23,

“we are saved by grace after all we can do”

but misunderstand and misinterpret that latter half in a perfectionist way. Rather, we  should read with 2 Nephi 10:24-

“after ye are reconciled unto God, that it is only in and through the grace of God that ye are saved.”

This suggests that “all we can do” is equivalent to “be reconciled unto God”, that is, commit to doing God’s will and trying to change when we fail to do so. That sounds a lot like the baptismal covenant, doesn’t it? More on covenant and relationships below. (On 2 Nephi 25:23, see Joe Spencer’s article here, and more recent treatments here and here.)

Other LDS passages— 2 Nephi 31:19; 3 Nephi 27:16, D&C 45:4-5 (D&C 38:3-4); Alma 33:11, 13 (Alma 41:6); 2 Nephi 2:3 (By whose righteousness is Jacob redeemed?), Moroni 10:32-33;

The JST on Romans 3:24, 28 (which is not found in LDS quad) adds a significant word.

“Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith alone without the deeds of the law.”

On making sense of this JST passage, see Kevin Barney’s article here.

And of course, D&C 20:30

“we know that justification through the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is just and true.”

 

In the New Testament, “the law” most often means “the Torah,” and the “works of the law” are its ritual requirements. It does not inherently imply legalism in general or specific, and Judaism was far less legalistic than most people think.

99% of the time, when you see “law” in the New Testament read “Torah” or “law of Moses” instead of “law” in general.  The “works of the law,” we know now, are those ritual requirements of the Torah, most usually abbreviated in the New Testament as “circumcision” and/or the Kosher food rules. How do we know this? There is a Dead Sea Scroll called Miqsat Ma’aseh ha-Torah (abbreviated MMT)1, or “Some Works of the Law.”

Some scholars have suggested that Paul misunderstood the Jewish teaching of his day or, at the very least, that he created a straw man to bolster his own teaching regarding faith versus law. In the past, this view was supported by the fact that the phrase “works of the law” nowhere appears in the foundational books of rabbinic Judaism. MMT, however, provides the “smoking gun” for which students [had] been searching for generations, not from the pages of rabbinic literature, but from the sectarian teachings of Qumran. MMT demonstrates that Paul was not jousting with windmills, but was indeed squared off in a dramatic duel—not with mainstream Judaism but with a sectarian theology—that ultimately defined Christianity. If I have understood rightly, the importance of MMT for New Testament research is nothing short of revolutionary.

– Martin Abegg, “Dead Sea Scrolls, Paul, ‘works of the Law’ and MMT,” Biblical Archaeology Review 20:06 1994.

That was in 1994. Nearly thirty years of research has confirmed this view.

On a related issue, to repeat myself,  Judaism wasn’t inherently legalistic, nor does “law” imply legalism. Any religion is susceptible to legalism, and certainly some Jews were legalistic, but the common equation that “Judaism in the New Testament= Legalism” we know to be flatly wrong.

In Galatians, for example, the problem when Paul keeps talking about “the law” is not legalism vs. grace, but Torah vs. Christ.

 

Grace was a Jewish Concept which Predated the New Testament, not a Christian/New Testament Innovation.

Grace is found throughout the Old Testament. I don’t want to expand on this too much, so see here.

Jews believed that they were in a covenant relationship with God. The terms of this relationship were that Jews would keep the requirements of the Torah, and in return God would bless them disproportionately to their obedience, in this world and the next, i.e. grace. It was not a legalistic quid pro quo.

The problem is that LDS have absorbed the view of Judaism put forth by the Protestant tradition from Martin Luther, who did not understand the Judaic context. Alas, from the reformation onwards, Luther’s interpretation of Paul has been heavily influential and became just part of the cultural air we breath.

In essence, Luther interpreted Paul and Judaism in light of his own conflict with the Catholic Church and its indulgences. He took that kind of salvific legalism, and read it back onto the Jews in Paul’s day, interpreting “works” in Paul’s letters as actions in general, instead of “the prescribed works of the Torah.” For Luther, Paul taught salvation by grace alone, no works.

In the last 40 years, however, as scholars have matured in their knowledge and understanding of the Dead Sea Scrolls (discovered 1947) and other relevant Judaic material from the time, many scholars have argued that Luther got it very wrong. Sure, some Jews were probably legalistic (every religion has some), but Judaism as a whole was not, nor did it predicate salvation on legalism. Paul’s discussion of works is about the works required by Law of Moses. Salvation comes from a covenant relationship with God in which he grants humans grace; faithfulness, which includes obedience, is the maintenance policy to that relationship. That was both the Jewish and Christian view of salvation, and differed only on the roles of Torah and Jesus within that formula.

Protestants are split between a “New Perspective on Paul”— which has the strength of better contextual scholarship, discussed below— and the traditional view from Luther— which has the immensely powerful force of tradition, as well as weaker scholarship, in my view. Not technically my field, but that’s how I read things.

In short,  Luther got Paul very wrong because he anachronistically read Paul as if he lived in Luther’s time, as if Paul’s 1st-century Jews were Luther’s medieval Catholics. The rediscovery of non-anachronistic Jewish views contemporary with the New Testament have demonstrated that such an equation was incorrect. So, we now have scholarship on Judaism, law, and legalism based on the Dead Sea Scrolls, like this (my emphasis, again)

The scrolls indicate in a number of passages that, although obedience to the divine law as properly understood was crucial, the Qumran [ or Dead Sea Scroll] community also had a strong sense that their election and salvation came through God’s grace. No less a person than the Instructor confesses in column 11 of the Rule of the Community his own sinfulness and inadequacy and the need for divine mercy. He acknowledges that he belongs among the company of wicked humans and that justification and atonement come not by works, but through God’s loving-kindness and righteousness:

“Surely a man’s way is not his own; neither can any person firm his own step. Surely justification is of God; by His power is the way made perfect. All that shall be, He foreknows, all that is, His plans establish; apart from Him is nothing done. As for me, if I stumble, God’s loving-kindness forever shall save me. If through sin of the flesh I fall, my justification will be by the righteousness of God which endures for all time. Though my affliction break out, He shall draw my soul back from the pit, and firm my steps on the way. Through His love He has brought me near; by His lovingkindness shall he provide my justification. By His righteous truth has He justified me; and through His exceeding goodness shall He atone for all my sins. By His righteousness shall He cleanse me of human defilement and the sin of mankind—to the end that I praise God for His righteousness, the Most High for His glory.” (1QS 11.10–15)

Similar sentiments appear frequently in the Thanksgiving Psalms. Naturally the ways out of the human predicament differ in the two literatures, but the recognition of human need for God’s grace is common to both.

But what was the purpose of the law? E. P. Sanders concludes that the place of obedience in Qumranic literature, as for other branches of Palestinian Judaism, “is always the same: it is the consequence of being in the covenant and the requirement for remaining in the covenant.” In other words, obedience to the law is not the entrance into a relationship with God, but rather the maintenance policy to that relationship.
In the light of MMT, then, several scholars are rethinking and rejecting the traditional Protestant understanding that by phrases such as works of the law Paul was challenging the theological teaching that salvation is earned by good works. Of Gal. 2:16 (“Yet we know that a person is justified not by the works of the law but through faith in Jesus Christ. And we have come to believe in Christ Jesus, so that we might be justified by faith in Christ, and not by doing the works of the law, because no one will be justified by the works of the law”), J. D. G. Dunn says:

“This [verse] has traditionally been understood as a denial that human beings, even the most religious of individuals, can achieve salvation by their own “works”; they cannot “work” their passage to heaven; they cannot earn salvation by their own efforts. Valid as that is as a theological insight of tremendous importance, it is doubtful whether it quite catches Paul’s meaning here. Paul was evidently objecting to a current Jewish conviction. But so far as we can tell, the typical and traditional Jewish view of the time was not that anyone could earn God’s favour.”

James C. VanderKam and Peter W. Flint, The Meaning of the Dead Sea Scrolls: Their Significance for Understanding the Bible, Judaism, Jesus, and Christianity, 1st ed., 351–352.

This new view of Judaism and Paul is called the New Perspective on Paul, and it’s really interesting. It includes something called covenantal nomism. Grace and God’s promises come through the covenant, but there is also law (Greek nomos) and requirements. You got in through the covenant, offered to you freely by God and not through any merit of your own. You stay in through keeping the covenant.

That is ‘covenantal nomism’: now that you’re in the covenant, here is the law to keep. Of course, it is a bit more complicated than that.

-Tom Wright, Justification: God’s Plan and Paul’s Vision, 53.

God graciously offers us the relationship, and we respond.

The whole point of covenantal nomism was to hold together both divine and human agency as equally necessary….

Rigorous obedience to the commandments was the expected response to God’s prior act of saving grace, not an attempt to earn it.

-Yinger, The New Perspective on Paul: An Introduction

E.P. Sanders was one of the pioneering scholars of the New Perspective.

According to Sanders, rather than demanding a perfect “works-righteousness” as the basis of one’s salvation and as the prerequisite for entering into the covenant, the “covenantal nomism” pervasively found throughout Palestinian Judaism “is the view that one’s place in God’s plan is established on the basis of the covenant and that the covenant requires as the proper response of man his obedience to its commandments, while providing means of atonement for transgression” (Sanders, 75). Thus, for Palestinian Judaism at the time of Paul, “the intention and effort to be obedient constitute the condition for remaining in the covenant, but they do not earn it” (Sanders, 180, emphasis his).

– Dictionary of Paul and His Letters, 673.

Further,

Torah observance, for Sanders, does not lead to a status that is not already possessed by the Israelite. Its function is to maintain the position in the covenant that God has already granted. Nomism, then, is not the means to salvation. Deeds are certainly not, on this scheme, weighed so that salvation and condemnation are awarded on the basis of works. It is the covenant, with its components of divine election and promise, which guarantees the salvation of all Israelites, with the exception of a small minority of egregious apostates…. Judaism, on Sanders’s account, emphasizes the priority of grace over the commandments. The replacement of a deeds-based judgment by a merciful judgment also meant that Sanders could undermine the old picture of Judaism as a religion of anxiety, in which each individual Jew would nervously await his or her works being weighed in the balance. Given God’s promises and his provision for atonement, the disposition of rabbinic religion was not fear but “the joy of the Torah.”-  “Covenantal Nomism,” ed. John J. Collins and Daniel C. Harlow, The Eerdmans Dictionary of Early Judaism.

Does that sound familiar? It might, if you’ve read Stephen Robinson’s books.  Too many LDS who have made covenants wonder at the end of the day if they’re “good enough.” The answer of course, is “no, of course not. But that’s not the relevant question.”

What I want to emphasize in this regard ought to be self-evident, but apparently a lot of us miss it. For members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, these critical steps, which are equivalent to entering into the kingdom, are already behind us. They are history. Therefore we are not waiting to see what some future verdict will decide. If we are in the covenant, the verdict is already in, and so are we. Since having faith, repenting, being baptized, and receiving the Holy Ghost all take place before we are counted members of the Church, those who are already members in good faith are already in the kingdom. We are in it now. For most of the readers of this book, the glorious threshold has already been crossed, and the doors of the kingdom have already closed gently behind us! If we are truly in his church, then we are truly in his kingdom.

Yet many of the Latter-day Saints who already believe in Christ, have already begun their repentance, have already been baptized, and have already received the gift of the Holy Ghost—in short, have already entered into the covenant—many of these people continue to think and act as though the determination of whether they are in or out of the kingdom; saved or damned; celestial, terrestrial, or telestial is somehow still in the future. They have been influenced by the common traditions of the world. Too many of the Saints see their mortal lives in the Church as a kind of porch or anteroom outside the kingdom doors. If they work hard enough in this life, they feel, the doors will eventually open up and admit them at some future time. Horsefeathers! Having been handed the good news of salvation, these people decline to open the envelope but continue to twist in the wind, wondering from day to day if they are being “good enough” to qualify for what they in fact already possess. They are like defendants in a court case who have been found innocent but who weren’t paying attention when the verdict was read and somehow missed it. So hours later they’re still sitting alone in the courtroom, wringing their hands and praying for acquittal—long after the judge and the jury have rendered their verdict and gone home.

-Stephen Robinson, Following Christ, chapter 1.

 

Grace in the New Testament (General)

As pointed out, grace was a Jewish concept throughout the Old Testament and contemporary with the New Testament. Paul did not invent grace terminology or concepts in a vacuum, but borrowed and adapted Greek terms and concepts from the larger greco-roman culture.

In the New Testament, for example, the word charis means “grace.” Pistis means “faith.” What we didn’t know until recently—what went without being said in Paul’s day—was that those two words together described the relationship between a patron and his or her client.
In the Roman world of the New Testament, business was conducted through an elaborate system of patrons and clients. When we watch the movie The Godfather, we are seeing the modern remains of the ancient Roman patronage system. Like Marlon Brando who played the godfather in the movie, the ancient patron was a wealthy and powerful individual (male or female) who looked after his or her “friends” (clients). The complex world of Roman governmental bureaucracy, the far-reaching tentacles of the banking system (usually temples) and the pervasive and powerful grasp of the trade guilds made it impossible for ordinary craftspeople or farmers to conduct business on their own. They were entirely dependent upon their patrons. Like most unwritten cultural rules, everyone knew what was expected of a patron and a client, even though expectations weren’t engraved on a wall. Everyone knew a patron’s role was to solve problems for his or her clients, whether it was trouble with the local trade guilds, refinancing a loan or smoothing over tensions with city leaders. When Paul was staying in Thessalonica, it was reasonable to expect Jason to handle the “Paul problem,” which he did by asking Paul to leave town (Acts 17).
In that world, an ordinary craftsman or farmer didn’t have the social skills or connections or wealth to negotiate with the various powerbrokers of a city. He would seek out an individual, a patron, to help. Marlon Brando captures the sentiment well. The local merchant wants help. The godfather says, “So you want me to do you this favor?” Both sides understand the agreement: the godfather solves the problem, and the merchant now must be loyal to the godfather and be ready to help if he is ever summoned. In the Roman system, likewise, the client couldn’t earn the “favor”; the patron showed “kindness” to help. Seneca, a philosopher from Paul’s time, said the patron and the client had a relationship, a form of friendship. The client was now a “friend” of the patron, but not a peer. The client was expected to reciprocate with loyalty, public praise, readiness to help the patron (as much as he could) and, most importantly, gratitude. This kind gift had strings attached. (All gifts in antiquity had strings attached.) Seneca called it “a sacred bond.” The recipient of the gift was obligated to reciprocate. Paul introduced Lydia to Christianity (Acts 16). She reciprocated by hosting Paul and his team at her estate.
The language of patronage permeated everyday life. We know well the Christian terms grace and faith, but these were common before Paul used them. They were part of the language of patronage. When the patron gave unmerited gifts of assistance, these were commonly called charis, meaning “grace/gift.” The client responded with faithfulness to the patron, called pistis, or “faith.” We see that when Paul explained our new relationship with God, he used something everyone understood: the ancient system of patronage. Taken together, this vocabulary—so central to the Christian faith—means something different than the sum of its parts.

– Misreading Scripture with Western Eyes: Removing Cultural Blinders to Better Understand the Bible (The two authors draw on, among others, the more scholarly Honor, Patronage, Kinship, & Purity: Unlocking New Testament Culture by DaSilva.) 



Grace, then, was the term for the actions that patrons took on behalf of their clients. You have a problem, so you enter into a mutually beneficial relationship in which you owe loyalty and obedience (i.e. “faith” and “faithfulness”) to a powerful patron  who takes care of the problem you can’t (i.e. “grace.”)

Let’s put this in more theological LDS terms. You have a big problem, namely, sin and death. You can’t handle it on your own, you can’t make the problem go away. So you go to God as your patron. “Hi God(father), I have a problem. It’s too big for me. It’s killing me, and I need it to go away.” God in return, asks for your “friendship,” your loyalty and fidelity, for he will one day (or every day) come to you and ask something of you.  He asks that you support him, speak well of him, and show loyalty. In return for those things… God will handle your problem, and make sin and death disappear. The handshake formalizing this relationship is baptism. That’s where you enter into this agreement, this relationship. You must maintain your friendship, your relationship, by doing what God asks of you (though he understands you may do so imperfectly.) He does and will perform grace on your behalf, provided you remain in good relations with each other.

 

What about James and Paul?

LDS missionaries are prone to countering Romans or other out-of-context quotes with James.

Since the Reformation James and Paul have often been viewed as having contradictory theologies, one focusing on works (see Works of the Law) and the other on grace. An examination of the critical texts shows, however, that in reality the two men used similar terms differently in separate contexts.

–Dictionary of Paul and His Letters “Paul and James.”

That article goes on to look at four possible relationships between Paul and James, and concludes thus (my insertions and emphasis)

It is clear, then, that James and Paul are moving in two different worlds. In James’s world Jewish ritual [i.e. Torah or “law”] is not an issue (perhaps because all of those in his church are Jews), but ethics is. His problems are with those who claim to be right with God on the basis of their orthodoxy (i.e., adherence to the proper creed, including that Jesus is Lord), although they were ignoring issues of obedience, especially charity. Abraham and Rahab, in contrast to the demons, demonstrate that saving faith manifests itself in its deeds.

Paul, on the other hand, is concerned in Romans and Galatians with the relationship of Jews and Gentiles in the church; that is, his concern is that a Gentile does not have to become a Jew to enter the kingdom. Commitment to Jesus as Lord (including the obedience which flows from this commitment) is all that is necessary for salvation; those ritual deeds [ the “works of the law”] which marked out the Jews as a distinct people are unnecessary for Gentiles (although not prohibited for Jews). In the instances where Paul does address the issue of whether a person can enter the kingdom while living in sin, he emphatically denies that this is possible (1 Cor 6:9; Gal 5:19–21), agreeing with James (Jas 2:14, 17, 26).

Other scholars largely concur, e.g. the Catholic New Testament scholar Luke Timothy Johnson, who says

[there is a] presumption… that James and Paul were addressing the same topic. They were not. In Paul, the contrast between faith and works was one between the faith in and of Jesus, as a soteriological principle, and the observance of the commandments of Torah, with its promise of life. The contrast in James is one that was common among Hellenistic moral philosophers: between speech and action (cf. Epictetus II.1.31; II.9.21; III.22.9; Dio Oration 35.2).

James decries a merely verbal profession of faith that fails to be lived out in appropriate behavior. The Paul who called for “faith working through love” (Gal. 5:6) would certainly agree, and indeed he makes the explicit declaration that humans are judged by God on the basis of their “works” (Rom. 2:6–8).” – The Writings of the New Testament, 508

Indeed, pistis— what the client owes the patron— includes obedience, loyalty, action. But when our Bibles translate pistis as “believe/belief” or “faith,” we are mislead as to what the proper response is to grace as well as the scriptural nature of “faith/belief.”

Luke Timothy Johnson makes the point that πίστις is often translated “faith” in English versions of the New Testament, but, in fact, the Greek word has a broad range of meaning that covers a wide spectrum: belief, trust, endurance, loyalty, obedience. When we translate πίστις only as “belief,” the polyvalent nature of the term is suppressed and the cognitive dimension often dominates.
– Nijay K. Gupta, Paul and the Language of Faith, 3.

 

Justification is a relationship word, when all is right between both parties

Let me requote these passages-

The JST on Romans 3:24, 28—not found in LDS quad— adds a significant (and maybe puzzling?) word- “Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith alone without the deeds of the law.” (On making sense of this JST passage, see Kevin Barney’s article here.)

D&C 20:30- “we know that justification through the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is just and true.”

What is justification? Translation obscures this a bit. It’s easy to see the relationship between the Greek adjective dikaios, the noun dikaiosunē, and the associated verb dikaiō but the respective English translations of “righteous,” “righteousness,” and “justify” have no such connection. That is,  to give a theological definition, to be “righteous” in the New Testament was to be living in a way that did not impede your relationship with God. It doesn’t mean perfection. Then we have the verb meaning, technically, “to justify, vindicate, prove to be right, be declared innocent.” It meant something like, “to be dikaios.” When do we enter into a relationship with God? When we reconcile ourselves to live according to his will… which once again, gets us into baptism and covenant.

LDS vs Protestants, or, Talking Past Each Other

For (most) Protestants, the ultimate end and goal is being redeemed from sin and death; for Latter-day Saints, that is a vital step, but our eternal potential goes beyond that. We must continually make decisions to act like Christ, thus becoming more Christlike “until the perfect day.” Protestants see that focus on discipleship, work, and becoming, and assume we are trying to earn our salvation, working to save ourselves.

For (most) Protestants, being reborn and sanctified by the spirit naturally leads to performing Christ-like actions, ie. good works. Someone who doesn’t do such works was never truly reborn. For LDS, being reborn means entering into a covenant with God, thereby promising to follow Jesus and change (repent), while God for his part promises salvation through the grace of the atonement. In other words, Christ-like actions and repentance are necessary to remain within the covenant.

So how do we differ from Protestants? They believe that good works naturally flow from being saved, and are evidence of having been redeemed and received the Holy Ghost. But they aren’t required, they don’t do anything… other than Good.

LDS on the other hand believe they show our bona fide desire to remain within the covenant, and transform us, helping us along the way to being as God is, perfect.

LDS and Protestants both agree that someone who has truly accepted Jesus will be doing good works. For us, they are necessary corollary of remaining in the covenant.

Both agree that if one simply proclaims one’s faith in Jesus and no good works follow, that proclamation is false.

So although why they are done, and for what purpose differ, both LDS and evangelicals agree that one cannot claim a covenantal Lord-servant relationship with Christ without performing good works. Or as Jesus himself said, “Why do you call me Lord and don’t do what I tell you?” (Luke 6:46)

We need to be very careful in our classes asserting “Evangelicals belief this” and “Evangelicals believe that” because Protestants (of which Evangelicals are only a part) are a hugely diverse group.

 

Why didn’t LDS Hear about Grace More in the Late 20th Century?

As demonstrated both in our own scriptures (above) and by David Paulsen’s historical article (below, Resources), grace is definitely an LDS thing. So why did we go through a period in which we emphasized works? I’d suggest two reasons.

First, for LDS, salvation is not a one-time event (using salvation in the most general sense, not the technical LDS “salvation vs. exaltation” sense.) Overcoming sin and death through the Atonement of God’s divine son and messiah Jesus, as momentous as it is, does not constitute the end for LDS. It is both a beginning (accepting Jesus and entering into a covenant relationship) and a means. That is, we believe that an individual’s choosing to keep God’s commandments changes that person, helps them become more Christlike. It may well take millions of years beyond the veil, as Joseph Smith said, but our goal eventually is to become as God himself is. That requires individual choice and will, millions of times over, with enabling grace. Grace that merely enables you to sit comfortably on your chair, not doing anything, is not transformative. Jesus will not point a wand at us, and zap us into perfection.

Let’s say you’re trying to motivate someone to achieve X, and X requires two things. One is already done for you, and the other requires your will and work, your heart and mind. You’ll naturally focus your encouragement, carrots, and sticks, on those bits you need to do, not the parts already done by someone else (as important as they might be).  So if we focus on the individual choices necessary to become, it’s easy to view this as a Gospel of works. But we can’t forget the only thing that makes this possible, namely, grace and atonement.

Without those, none of our choices would matter.

The second reason we didn’t hear more about grace boils down to “theological cooties,” an overly strong counter-response to real or perceived abuses of the doctrine of grace among Protestants, e.g. “cheap grace” (as Bonhoeffer termed it.) Robert Millett tells this personal story.

One can fully appreciate why the Latter-day Saints would develop an attitude toward all others of “us versus them” and begin to erect a doctrinal fortress to protect themselves from any invading theological forces. Indeed, it seems that Mormons began to focus more and more upon their distinctions, those doctrinal matters that were either slightly or greatly different from Protestant and Catholic teachings.

This kind of doctrinal dialectic continued well into the twentieth century. Let me illustrate with a personal example. Just before leaving for a mission, I found myself reading and thinking about the gospel with a bit of trepidation. After spending several days browsing through some of the great doctrinal chapters in the Book of Mormon, I approached my father with a question. (I need to add at this point that my father had grown up in Louisiana as a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, taught seminary to the youth for many years, and knew the principles and doctrines of the gospel well.) I asked, “Dad, what does it mean to be saved by grace?” He stared at me for a moment and then said ﬁrmly, “We don’t believe in that!” I responded with, “We don’t believe in it? Why not?” He promptly added, “Because the Baptists do!”

My father’s statement speaks volumes. We had grown up in the Bible Belt, where we were surrounded by many noble and dedicated Christians who loved the Lord and had given their hearts to him. Over the years, we had watched scores of revivals on television and spent hours listening to radio broadcasts in which the pastor had affirmed that salvation comes “by grace alone.” Knowing as he did that Latter-day Saints believed in the necessity of good works, my father had simply put the matter to rest by stating that we believed something very different.” -Robert L. Millet, “Joseph Smith’s Christology: After Two hundred Years” in The Worlds of Joseph Smith, ed. John Welch, p. 233.

So between an overreaction to “cheap grace” and a focus on what grace enables us to do (namely, make those choices over and over which help us become more Christlike and Godlike), we didn’t hear much about grace. And when we did, it was often a caricature.

What Was the Point of Religion in NT Times?

This is something often lost on moderns. Greco-roman religion, as well as non-Israelite religion, had little to say about an afterlife.  You did not worship the gods because of something coming later, and the gods didn’t really put any burdens or demands on you except to serve them with the proper prayers and sacrifices. One of the key differences between Israelite/Judaic religion and that of the surrounding nations, then amplified by Christianity, was that the God of Israel made ethical demands on his followers. Serving God meant changing your behavior, not merely offering the right sacrifices at the right times. This was a really really radical thing.

 

Closing

In summary, we tend to misread the New Testament, misstate what our Protestant or Catholic neighbors actually believe, and misunderstand our own scriptural teachings on the relationship between grace, works, law, and salvation. I’ll quote this again (see above for reference), and follow it with an LDS teaching.

“But what was the purpose of the Law [of Moses]?… the place of obediance in Qumranic literature, as for other branches of Palestinian Judaism, ‘is always the same: it is the consequence of being in the covenant and the requirement for remaining in the covenant.’
In other words, obediance to the law is not the entrance into the relationship with God, but rather the maintenance policy to that relationship.” Meaning of the Dead Sea Scrolls (p. 352)

“To Latter-day Saints, the words saved and salvation in this teaching signify a present covenant relationship with Jesus Christ in which we are assured salvation from the consequences of sin if we are obedient”–Elder Oaks, 55. (article linked below)

Resources, in no particular order or utility:

If this is all new to you, I’d recommend starting with the Ensign articles and Stephen Robinson’s books, with the caveat that they only represent one view, which has been contested by other faithful LDS scholars. Sanders’ book is also probably quite good.

Robert Millett, “The Perils of Grace” in BYU Studies 53:2 (2014) LINK
Joseph Spencer,”What Can we Do? Reflections of 2 Nephi 25:23″ in Religious Educator, LINK
See also the podcast here with Joe and Adam Miller, below. (I haven’t actually listens to this.)
Bruce Hafen “Grace” in Encyclopedia of Mormonism
David Paulsen “Works, Worship, and Grace” which includes a historical survey on LDS usage and understanding of grace. It’s not a new thing in LDS scripture or thought. LINK
Adam Miller’s book, Grace is Not God’s Backup Plan: An Urgent Paraphrase of Paul’s Letter to the Romans
Grant Underwood,”REFLECTIONS ON JUSTIFICATION, THEOSIS, AND GRACE IN CHRISTIAN AND MORMON THOUGHT”- in the International Journal of Mormon Studies
 Elder Oaks, “Have You Been Saved?” Ensign (May 1998): 55-57.
President Uchtdorf, “The Gift of Grace”, Ensign
 Elder Christofferson, “Justification and Sanctification,” Ensign (June 2001)
Robinson, Stephen. Believing Christ: The Parable of the Bicycle and Other Good News, (Salt Lake: Deseret Book, 1992), esp. 57-76. Cf. Following Christ (Salt Lake: Deseret Book, 1995).
Robinson, Stephen. Are Mormons Christians? (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1991): 104-109.
Robert Millet, Grace Works. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 2003). (Directed to an LDS audience)
Robert Millet, A Different Jesus? The Christ of the Latter-day Saints (directed to an Evangelical audience, from an Evangelical publisher): 95-104.
Blomberg, Craig L., and Stephen E. Robinson. How Wide the Divide: A Mormon and an Evangelical in Conversation. (Downers Grove, Ill: InterVarsity Press, 1997):143-186.
 Responses to HWD:MEC in FARMS Review of Books 11:2 (1999), particularly Ostler (p. 165-176).
Ostler, Blake. “The Concept of Grace in Christian Thought.” Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 23:4 (Winter 1990): 13-43.
Ostler, Blake T. “The Development of the Mormon Concept of Grace.”>Dialogue 24: 1 (Spring 1991): 57-84.
E.P Sanders- Paul: A Very Short Introduction
Brent Schmidt (LDS), Relational Grace: The Reciprocal and Binding Covenant of Charis 
Tom Wright, Justification: God’s Plan and Paul’s Vision
Yinger, The New Perspective on Paul: An Introduction
As always, you can help me pay my tuition here via GoFundMe. *I am an Amazon Affiliate, and may receive a small percentage of purchases made through Amazon links on this page. You can get updates by email whenever a post goes up (subscription box below) and can also follow Benjamin the Scribe on Facebook.

Share this:
FacebookX
Related
The Most Important Question I’ve Been Asked
March 4, 2020
In "Announcements"
Mormons, Evangelicals, Tradition, and Sunday School
May 15, 2016
In "Gospel Doctrine"
Church History/ Doctrine& Covenants Resources (and the blog) for 2025
December 13, 2024
In "books"
Categories: Gospel Doctrine Resources, history, New Testament, scripture study, teaching
« Five Ways We Can Misread Paul and How to Avoid Doing So
Come Follow Me: Romans »
9 Comments

Miriam Attia
July 31, 2019 at 8:34 pm

Thank you, thank you for this faithful (in the sense of “accurate”) rendering of the so-often-misunderstood theological topography of these eras. The only thing I want to add is that when you (and VanderKam and Flint) say that in mainstream NT-era Judaism, obedience to the law is the covenant’s “maintenance policy,” that strikes me as missing something important and relevant to this discussion. Throughout Talmudic writings, being obligated to follow the law is seen as a privilege and a joy. Collins and Harlow touch on this when they mention “the joy of Torah,” but they don’t really explain it (at least not in the part you quoted). This is also, I think, the root of the enthusiasm tradition that animates Chassidic movements today. To be bound by the law elevates the individual and is the life source for the group, so to fulfill commandments is seen as cause for celebration. The giving of the law is an act of grace in itself because God’s law is seen as an endless source of wisdom, so Torah is the text that keeps on giving. By studying it deeply, people can unlock the code for how to live wisely and sustainably together, how to flourish as a society.

That view of Mosaic law is also conspicuously missing from Lutherian understandings. In Luther and those he influences, law is understood as something like the millstone that drowns the poor sinful individual. In mainstream Judaism of antiquity (as well as much of Judaism today), it’s more like the lifeboat that keeps the whole group afloat. I can’t speak as an insider to LDS communities, but from what I’ve seen, LDS views resemble Protestant ones more than Jewish ones in that LDS teachings seem to treat the law as something that’s good for you, but uncomfortable. I’ve often seen LDS exhort and encourage one another to be obedient, but I’ve never seen them obey in a celebratory way.


Ben S
August 1, 2019 at 3:15 pm

Thanks for reading and commenting Miriam.
I agree that LDS approaches to obedience don’t track the simchat torah of Judaism. I haven’t seen any kind of celebratory approaches. I suspect much of that is that, although LDS have Catholic structures and tend to be far more philosophical-judaic or philo-semitic than other Christians, the LDS church culture arose in an area absolutely soaked in Protestantism.


Jesse H
August 8, 2019 at 5:30 pm

I can appreciate how thoroughly you’ve researched this. Conversation is good, and in a sense there will always be a paradox as we contemplate the juxtaposition of beliefs and behavior. But if we really boil it down to one central truth, Christianity has always said that being saved by grace is a matter of divine accomplishment, not human achievement. God saves us, Christ redeems us, the Spirit seals us. And this is accomplished by faith, which at its essence has to be contrasted with works, since that is what Paul does in Rom. 3:27-28 and 11:5-6.
So even as Bates has posited faith as allegiance (which overstates the case, failing to understand the difference between cause and effect) and there is some agreement on the present aspect of salvation among Protestants and LDS (a covenant relationship, an ongoing deliverance from sin to righteousness) there is still a huge chasm between the beginning and ending points of salvation.
All Catholics/Protestants will agree that there is a beginning point of faith which grants entrance into the kingdom, eternal life, justification, salvation from sin’s penalty. Thus one can say, “I have eternal life, I’m in the kingdom, I’m saved, I’m heaven-bound, I’m righteous before God, my sins are forgiven.”

This is not how LDS phrase it, even though Millet and Robinson come close. There’s a reason why “saved by grace through faith” is agreed upon by all Christians.


Michaela Walker Stephens
August 12, 2019 at 2:04 pm

I have to echo that I really love this. I’d been struggling with seemingly contradictory statements in Romans, as well as how to explain them to 16-17 year olds. I was also struggling with feelings of increasing inadequacy. But the patron-client relationship really struck me. And to see how covenants and obedience fits into that, was very illuminating. Suddenly it felt like I could see WHY we can celebrate. And commandments are reasons for celebration because they are a vehicle for the infusion of more of God’s grace.
Not only that, but they help us find optimal satisfaction in healthy ways and deal with the messiness of life in optimal ways.


Ben S
August 13, 2019 at 11:10 am

Thanks for the comment Michaela. I’m glad it’s useful.


Gabe Ariciu
December 3, 2019 at 11:30 am

Thanks Ben! This has been a fantastic read. I love how well you stated this. It’s been something of a personal study of mine to understand more deeply. I recently finished Ricks’ and Baker’s book Who Shall Ascend into the Hill of the Lord. They explored this concept quite a bit in their chapter on pistis. I’ll be sharing this article for sure.


Daniel Ortner
July 22, 2023 at 9:58 am

Ben,

This is a very excellent summary of some of the arguments of the New Perspective on Paul. Would you consider engaging a bit more with some of the very thoughtful critics of the New Perspective and what your thoughts are on their counterarguments?

I see two major problems with the New Perspective from what I have read (which admittedly is not as much as you have on the topic).

1) I find that the New Perspective struggles in reading Paul’s writings in Romans and Galatians in a manner that takes into account the whole thrust of Paul’s argument such as Paul’s extensive efforts to explain why mankind is universally under condemnation. It seems like the New Perspective is very good at addressing certain verses, but not nearly as good at addressing the overall thrust of Paul’s argument.

2) The New Perspective’s picture of legalism in Judaism doesn’t seem to take into account the best evidence of what Paul was responding to and interacting with, which is his own writings about his past experiences as a Pharisee. For instance, Paul describes himself as previously having had confidence in the flesh and faultless in his obedience of the law. Phil 3: 4-6). Paul obviously sees his prior pharisaical background as legalistic and contrasts grace in Christ with that. The New Perspective also seems to not take Jesus’s own words describing the Pharisees as rigid and hypocritical and lacking in grace towards sinners into full account.


benspackman (Post author)
July 22, 2023 at 10:02 am

Yinger, Wright, and others all address these quite adequately.


larryco_
August 19, 2023 at 6:00 am

I like this definition of how Paul uses “pistis” in his writings:

“The main elements of faith in its relation to God, as distinct from faith in man, are especially brought out in the use of the noun ‘pistis’; they are (1) a firm conviction, producing a full acknowledgement of God’s revelation or truth; (2) a personal surrender to Him; (3) a conduct inspired by such surrender.” “Studies in the vocabulary of the Greek New Testament”, Kenneth Wuest.

Simply insert allegiance for surrender and you get basically your point in #2.
==============================================================================
==============================================================================
==============================================================================
==============================================================================