---
title: "The Restored Gospel of Jesus Christ"
description: "Heavenly Father's truth once again on earth"
featured_image: "/images/vision.jpeg"
date: 2025-03-25T11:00:59-04:00
tags: ['Wilford Woodruff', 'Vision']
---


# June 15 1878 Wilford Woodruff Journal entry

June 15, 1878 ~ Saturday

15 A hand pointing to the right I wrote 28 & spent most of the day in the office
I had a vary strange vision copied in the office to day
of a Desolating sickness which covered the whole land

A Vision

Salt Lake City, Night of Dec 16, 1877

I [blank] went to bed at my usual hour half past nine oclok I had been reading the Revolations in the French Language, my mind was calm, more so than usual if possible to be so. I composed myself for sleep but could not sleep. I felt a strange stupor come over me and apparently became partially unconscious, still I was not asleep, nor awoke With a strange far away dreamy feelings the first I recognized was that I was in the Tabernacle at Ogden sitting on the back seat in the corner for fear they would call upon me to Preach which after singing the second time, they did by calling me to the stand. I arose to speak and said I did not know that I had any thing special to say except to bear my Testimony to the Truth of the Latter Day work when all at once it seemed as though I was lifted out of myself, and I said "yes I have sumthing to say, it is this—some of my brethren present have been asking me what is coming to pass, what is the wind blowing up. I will answer you right here what is coming to pass shortly. I was immediately in Salt Lake City wandering about the streets in all parts of the city and on the door of every house I found a badge of mourning, and I could not find a house but what was in mourning. I passed by my own house and saw the same sigm there, and asked "Is that me that is dead?" Sumthing gave me answer "No youll live through it all." It seemed strange to me that I saw no person [on] the street in my wandering about through the city, they seemed to be in their houses with their sick and Dead. I saw no funeral possession, or any thing of that kind, but the city looked vary still and quiet as though the people were praying and had controll of the desease what ever it was I then looked in all directions over the Territory, East West North and South, and I found the same mourn- ing in every place throughout the Land. The next I knew I was Just this side of Omaha. It seemed as though I was above the Earth, looking down to it as I passed along on my way East and I saw the roads full of people principally women with just what they could carry in bundles on therir backs travelling to the mountains on foot, and I wond- ered how they could get there, with nothing but a small pack upon their backs. It was remarkable to me that there were so few men among them, it did not seem as though the cars were running the rails looked rusty, and the road abandoned, And I have no conception how I travelled myself As I looked down upon the people I continued Eastward through Omaha and Council Bluffs which were full of disease, and women every whare. The states of Missouri and Illinois were in turmoil and strife Men killing each other, and women joining in the fight, family against family cutting each other to peaieces in the most horrid manner. The next I saw was Washington, and I found the city a Desolation. The white House Empty, the Halls of Congress the same. Every thing in ruins, the people seemed to have fled from the city and left it to take care of itself. I was next in the city of Baltimore and in the square whare the Monument of 1812 stands, in front of St Charles and other Hotels I saw the Dead piled up so high as to fill the square I saw Mothers cut the throats of thereir own children for the sake of their blood, which they drank from their veins, to quench their thirst and then lie down and die. The waters of the Chesapeake and of the city were so stagnant and such a stench arose from them on account of the putrefaction of Dead bodies that the vary smell caused Death, and that was singular again I saw no men except they were dead, lying in the streets, and vary few women, and they were crazy mad, and in a dying condition Every whare I went I beheld the same all over the city, And it was horrible beyound description As I looked down upon the people I continued Eastward through Omaha and Council Bluffs which were full of disease, and women every whare. The states of Missouri and Illinois were in turmoil and strife Men killing each other, and women joining in the fight, family against family cutting each other to peaieces in the most horrid manner. The next I saw was Washington, and I found the city a Desolation. The white House Empty, the Halls of Congress the same. Every thing in ruins, the people seemed to have fled from the city and left it to take care of itself. I was next in the city of Baltimore and in the square whare the Monument of 1812 stands, in front of St Charles and other Hotels I saw the Dead piled up so high as to fill the square I saw Mothers cut the throats of thereir own children for the sake of their blood, which they drank from their veins, to quench their thirst and then lie down and die. The waters of the Chesapeake and of the city were so stagnant and such a stench arose from them on account of the putrefaction of Dead bodies that the vary smell caused Death, and that was singular again I saw no men except they were dead, lying in the streets, and vary few women, and they were crazy mad, and in a dying condition Every whare I went I beheld the same all over the city, And it was horrible beyound description to look at. I thought this must be the End. But No I was seemingly in Philadelphia and there every- thing was still no living soul was to be seen to greet me, and it seemed as though the whole city was without an inhabitant. In arch and chestnut street and in fact Every whare I went the putrifaction of the Dead bodies caused such a stench that it was Impossible for any creature to Exhist alive, nor did I see any living thing in the city. I next found myself in Broadway New York and here it seemed the people had done their best to overcome the Disease. But in wandering down Broadway I saw the bodies of Beautiful women lying stone dead, and others in a dying condition on the side walk. I saw men crawl out of the cellars and rob the dead bodies of the valuables they had on and before they could return to their coverts in the cellars they themselves would roll over a time or towo and die in agony. On some of the back streets I saw Mothers kill their own children and Eat raw flesh and then in a few minuts die themselves. Whareever I went I saw the same scenes of Horror and Desolation rapine and Death. No Horses or carriages, No busses or street cars, but Death and Destruction evry whare I then went to the Grand Central Park and looking back I saw a fire start and just at that moment a mighty East wind sprang up and carried the flames west over the city, and it burned untill there was not a single building left standing whole Even down to the wharfs, and the shiping all seemed to be burned and swallowed up in the common destruction and left Nothing but a Desolation whare the great city was a short time before. The stench from the bodies that were burning was so great that it was carried a great distance across the Hudson River and bay, and thus spread deisease and death whareever the flames penetrated. I cannot paint in words the Horror that seemed to Encompass me around It was beyound description or thought of man to conceive. I supposed this was the End but I was here given to understand, that the same horror was being enacted all over the country, North South East and West, that few were left alive still there were some. Immediately after I seemed to be standing on the west bank of the Missouri River opposite the city of Independance but I saw no city. I saw the whole states of Missouri & Illinois and part of Iowa were a com- plete wilderness with no living human being im them. I then saw a short distance from the river Twelve men dressed in the robes of the Temple stand[in]g in a square or nearly so. I understood it respresented the Twelve gates of the New Jerrusalem, and they were with hands uplifted consecrating the ground and laying the Corner Stones. I saw myriads of Angels hovering over them and around about them and also an immens pillar of a cloud over them and I heard the singing of the most beautif music the words "Now is esstablished the Kingdom of our God and his Christ and He shall reign forever and Ever, and the Kingdom shall never be Thrown down for the Saints have overcome" and I saw people coming from the River and different places a long way off to help build the Temple, and it seemed that the Hosts of the angels also helped to get the material to build the Temple, and I saw some come who wore their Temple clothing rob[e]s to help build the Temple and the city and all the time I saw the great pillar of cloud hovering over the place Instantly I found I was in the Tabernacle at Ogden yet I could see the building going on and got quite animated in calling to the people in the Tabernacle to listen to the beautiful music that the Angels were Making. I called to them to look at the Angels as the House seemed to be full of them and they were saying the same words that I heard Before "Now is the Kingdom of Our God Esstablished forever & Ever.["] and then a voice said "Now shall come to pass that which was spoken by Isaiah the Prophet "That seven women shall take hold of one man saying["] &c. [Isaiah 4:1] At this time I seemed to stagger back from the pulpit & F D Richards and some one els caught me and prevented me from falling when I requested Brother Richards to apologise to the audience for me because I stoped so adruptly and tell them I had not fainted but was exhausted. I rolled over in my bed and heard the City Hall clock strike Twelve